Alumni Relations Advisory 02 (Version 1.0, December 2021)                                 Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
HONORARY  ALUMNI PROGRAM AT IIT GANDHINAGAR  
(As approved by the BoG in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021)  
 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 
2021 approved the following Honorary Alumni Program  at IIT Gandhinagar.  
  
1. Individuals who are not graduates of IIT Gandhinagar and who make significant 
contributions to the welf are, reputation, impact and prestige of IIT Gandhinagar 
may be recognized by IITGN as Honorary Alumni.  
 
2. Honorary Alumni membership will be open to individuals who have shown 
significant goodwill and support to IIT Gandhinagar. The current faculty/ staff of 
IITGN may not be nominated but former faculty/ staff may be nominated.  
 
3. The membership will be recomme nded by a Committee consisting of  
  
a) Professor -in-Charge/Dean, Alumni Relation (or nearest equivalent in the 
Institute)  
b) Professor -in-Charge/Dean, External Relations (or nearest equivalent in the 
Institute)  
c) Professor -in-Charge/Dean, Institutional Advancement  (or nearest equivalent 
in the Institute)  
d) One present or former Council Nominee to the Board of Governors of IITGN  
 
4. Recommendations of the Committee will be placed before the Director for 
approval. All such approval will be reported to the Board of Governo rs in its next 
meeting.   
 
5. The following norms will apply to honorary alumni : 
 Honorary Alumni members page in the Alumni Portal will display their photo 
and brief bio.  
 No fee will be applicable for Honorary Alumni membership.  
 Honorary Alumni will be eligi ble for IITGN Alumni email id.  
 Honorary Alumni Card will be issued to all the Members.    
 Honorary Alumni membership can be revoked by the Board of Governors of 
IIT Gandhinagar at any time without providing any reasons to the member.  
 
 Academic Affairs Advisory 5 8 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 1 of 10 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
Norms for e -Masters Programme in Industrial Safety Engineering  
 (As approved by the Senate  in its 61st meeting held on 15th November 2022 ) 
 
 
Overall Structure  of the Programme:  
[Approx. 10 full course equivalents of 4 credits, 1 credit equivalent to 10 hrs.]  
[Min. 400 hrs of engagement required for e -Master’s degree]  
 
No. Course Title  Type  Credits  Engagement (h)  
1 Process Principles and Calculations  Foundation  4 40 
2 Basic Topics of Engineering  Foundation  4 40 
3 Hazard Identification and Risk 
Assessment  Core  4 40 
4 Chemical Process Safety and 
Management  Core  4 40 
5 Fire Protection and Emergency 
Response  Core  4 40 
6 Industrial Safety & Health Legislations  Core  4 40 
7 Industrial Hygiene & Occupational Safety  Core  4 40 
8 Electrical and Maintenance Safety  Core  4 40 
9 Accident Investigation and Forensics  Core  2 20 
10 Sustainable Environment   Core  2 20 
11 Economics of Safety  Core  2 20 
12 Emerging Technologies in Safety 
Engineering  Core  2 20 
13 Behavioral Safety  Core  2 20 
14 Capstone Project 1   Core  4 40 
15 Capstone Project 2  Core  4 40 
16 Writing & Leadership  HSS 4 40 
 Total   54 540 
 
 
Break -up of courses:  
Course Type  List of Courses from the Program Structure  Engagement 
(h) 
Foundation (8 Credits)  (1) Process Principles and Calculations  
(2) Basic Topics of Engineering  80 
Core (42 Credits)  
[6 Courses with 40 h each 
(24 Credits) and 5 
Courses with 20 h each 
(10 Credits) and One 
Capstone project (4 
credits]  (1) Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment, (2) 
Chemical Process Safety and Management, (3) 
Fire Protection and Emergency Response, (4 ) 
Industrial Safety & Health Legislation, (5) 
Industrial Hygiene & Occupational Safety, (6) 
Electrical and Maintenance Safety (7) Industrial 
Accident Investigation and Forensics, (8) 
Sustainable Environment, (9) Economics of Safety 420 Academic Affairs Advisory 5 8 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 2 of 10 (10) Emerging Technologi es in Safety Engineering 
(11) Behavioral Safety (12 & 13) Two Capstone 
Project Courses  
Communication/Leaders
hip 
(4 Credits)  (1) Writing & Leadership  40 
Total 54 Credits  Total Engagement (h)   540 
 
Course contents:  
 
1. Process Principles & Calculations [40 h of Engagement]  
 
 Course Objective : It is a foundational course.  At the end of the course, the student will 
refresh and rebuild the fundamentals in the domain, develop basic problem -solving skills, 
and know the vari ous processes, principles and operations in the industries covering 
mass transfer, heat transfer and reaction, including key separation processes.  
  
 Course Content :  
 Unit conversions, Stoichiometry; material and energy balances; multiphase process, 
material and energy balances with chemical reactions; purge and recycle; thermophysics 
and thermochemistry; first law of thermodynamics and its applications, Energy calculat ion 
for industrial operations, Basics of Mass Transfer, Heat Transfer operation and Reaction 
Engineering; Basics of key separation processes in industries such as Gas absorption, 
Distillation, Drying, Humidification operations, Crystallization etc.  
 
 Mode of conduct : The course will have lectures followed by practice problems covering 
various processes. Students will solve problems through assignments and discuss 
various case studies in problem -solving sessions on mass balance and energy 
calculations. The c ourse will have quizzes and semester exam.  
 
 References:  
i. Elementary Principles of Chemical processes, Felder, R. M. and Rousseau, Ronald 
W.,  New Delhi: Wiley India., 2000  
ii. Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, McCabe, Warren L, Harriott, Peter, Smith,  
Julian C., Boston: McGraw -Hill Higher Education, 2005  
 
2. Basic Topics of Engineering [40 h of Engagement]  
 
 Course Objective : A foundational course to refresh the basics topics of engineering 
including probability, statistics and data handling. At the end of the course, the student 
will refresh the basic topics in Engineering including hydraulics and compression, 
instrument calibration and measurements, fatigues in metals, thermodynamics, process 
control, various transport processes.  
  
 Course Content :  
 Engineering data; Elementary probability and statistics (random variables, distribution, 
central limit theorem); population sampling, confidence intervals; Basics of Transport Academic Affairs Advisory 5 8 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 3 of 10 Phenomena Unidirectional flows: steady and unsteady; Governing equations of heat 
transfer Governing equations of mass transfer Basics of phase equilibrium, Ideal 
Solutions Raoult’s Law, Henry’s law, Vapor - Liquid - Equilibrium. Non -ideal solutions; . 
Basics of Process Control, Basics of machine tools, Hydraulics and pneumatics 
compari son, Pressure, Flow and direction control valves; Temp & pressure 
compensation; Actuators accumulators and intensifiers; Process parameter 
measurements and calibration of various instruments,  Corrosion and its influence by 
various environmental factors, F atigue of metals – Stress cycle, S -N curve, cyclic stress -
strain curve, fatigue crack propagation, effect of metallurgical variables, corrosion fatigue; 
creep and stress rupture, superplasticity, fracture at elevated temperature; Properties of 
concrete and  reinforcing steel, design philosophies  
 
 Mode of conduct : The course will have lectures followed by practice problems covering 
various processes. Students will solve problems through assignments. The course will 
have quizzes and semester exam.  
 
 References:  
i. Applied Statistics and Probability for Engineers, Douglas C. Montgomery, G. C. 
Runger, , John Wiley and Sons, 2003.  
ii. Transport Phenomena, Bird, R. B., Stewart, W.E.  and Lightfoot, E.N.,  2nd ed., Wiley, 
2006  
iii. Introduction to Chemical Engineering  Thermodynamics, Smith, J.M. , Van Ness H.C. 
and Abbott, M.M. 6th ed., McGraw -Hill, 2001.  
iv. Chemical Process Control: An Introduction to Theory and Practice, Stephanopoulos, 
G. Prentice Hall, New Delhi, 1984  
 
3. Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment [40 h of Engagement]  
 
      Course Objective : The student will learn to identify Hazard, HAZOP studies, and risk 
and consequence analysis through risk assessment using various failure mode analyses. 
The student will also learn Quantitative Risk Analysis hands -on. 
 
 Course Content : Hazards Identification, Methodology for carrying out a HAZID, HAZID 
application, Process Hazards Checklists,  Hazards Surveys, Hazards and Operability 
Studies (HAZOP), HAZOP exercise, Safety reviews and Major accident Hazard 
scenarios, Dow index, Mond’s index, Consequence analysis, frequency, Risk Analysis, 
and estimation, Bow tie analysis, tolerability and acceptability, risk perception, Risk 
Assessment & Risk Reduction, Common Mode Failures, Failure Mode and Equipment 
Analysis (FMEA st udy), Event Trees, Fault Trees, Quantitative calculations using the 
Fault Tree, Quantitative Risk Analysis (QRA) and Layer of Protection Analysis (LOPA), 
Developing scenario for LOPA and risk decision using LOPA, Safety Instrumented 
Systems (SIS), Related software and hands -on 
 
 Mode of conduct : The course will have lectures and followed by case studies and group 
discussion. Students are going to do QRA and solve problems through assignments. The 
course will have quizzes and semester exam.  
 
 
 
 Academic Affairs Advisory 5 8 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 4 of 10  References:  
i. Layer of protection analysis: simplified process risk assessment: Series: A CCPS 
concept book, by Center for Chemical Process Safety (CCPS), New York: John Wiley 
& Sons, 2001  
ii. Guidelines for chemical process quantitative risk analysis, 2nd ed. by Center for 
Chemical Process Safety (CCPS), New York John Wiley & Sons 2000  
iii. Evaluating process safety in the chemical industry: a user`s guide to quantitative risk 
analysis : Series: A CCPS concept book by Arendt, J. S, Lorenzo, D. K., New York 
John Wile y & Sons 2000  
 
4. Chemical Process Safety and Management [40 h of Engagement]  
 
 Course Objective : The course will cover the elements of Process Safety Management 
and inherently  safer design. The student will learn the fundamentals of runaway 
reactions and as pects of reactor safety, including handling, storage, and transportation of 
reactive chemicals, petroleum products, dust etc. The student will learn various National 
and International guidelines on compliance.        
 
 Course Content : Hazardous and reactive chemicals, reactor safety and runaway 
reaction, Toxic release and various dispersion models at various scenario, inherently 
safer design,  Relief Scenarios and its design considerations, Relief Sizing,  Fire and 
explosion, Domino eff ect, Vapor Cloud Explosions, Flash Fires, and BLEVEs, Case 
studies. Safety in storage and transportation of petroleum products, underground 
storages, loading and unloading, venting and relief, atmospheric vent, flame arrestors, 
fire relief - fire preventio n.  Dust explosion and various explosibility characteristics, Dust 
ignition sources – Dust explosion prevention and protection.   
 Elements of Process Safety Management - Guidelines for Compliance (OSHA 3133), 
OISD guidelines, Process Safety Management (PS M) system implementation and its 
actual process safety performance. Guidelines for plant commissioning, inspection and 
operations, Review of International safety audits, safety audit report     
 
 Mode of conduct : The course will have regular lectures and c ase studies will be 
discussed in the class along with some design problems. The students are going to take 
assignments and quizzes, along with the semester exams.  
 
 References:  
i. Chemical Process Safety: Fundamentals with applications, Daniel A. Crowl, Jose ph 
F. Louvar, Upper Saddle River, NJ Prentice Hall 2011  
ii. Lees` Loss Prevention in the Process Industries: hazard identification, assessment 
and control, edited by Sam Mannan, Oxford Butterworths Heinemann 2012  
iii. Guidelines for Process Safety Fundamentals in g eneral Plant Operations, Center for 
Chemical Process Safety, by Center for Chemical Process Safety, New York : 
American Institute of Chemical Engineers, 1995  
 
5. Fire Protection and Emergency Response [40 h of Engagement]  
 
 Course Objective : The course will provide design aspects and fundamentals of Fire 
Science. It will also provide a guideline and good practices for emergency preparedness 
for industrial disasters.  
 Academic Affairs Advisory 5 8 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 5 of 10  Course Content : Fires and Explosions,  Detonation and Deflagration, Fire Triangle, 
Flammability diagram and characteristics of liquids and vapors and its mixtures, ignition, 
autoignition, auto -oxidation, Alarm and detection systems,  Principles of fire suppression 
for various class of fire, active and passive fire  protection s ystems, Fire hydrant  and 
Hydraulic calculation, foam generators,  Sprays and Mists, Confined Explosions, TNT 
equivalent  and Blast damage due to overpressure, Structures under fires,  Design 
aspects to prevent fires and explosions, Inserting and purging, ad vanced firefighting 
technics and media, Designs for preventing fires and explosions.  
 Emergency and disaster planning (onsite and offsite - natural / man -made), roles and 
responsibility and communications in emergency, rescue, relief and rehabilitation pla n, 
mitigation, preparedness and evacuation plan, critical equipment handling,   Various 
codes and standards related to fire, adequacy check.  
 
 Mode of conduct : The course will have regular lectures and followed by case studies 
and group discussion. Studen ts are going to solve assignment problems. The course will 
have quizzes and semester exam.  
 
 References:  
i. Principles of Fire Behavior by Quintiere, James G., New York: Delmar Cengage 
Learning, 1998  
ii. Handbook of fire and explosion protection engineering principles : for oil, gas, chemical 
and related facilities by Dennis P. Nolan., Westwood, N.J: Noyes Publications, 1996  
iii. Engineering analysis of fires and explosions by Randall K. Noon, Boca Raton CRC 
Press c1995  
 
6. Industrial Safety & Health Legislations [40  h of engagement]  
 
 
 Course Objective : The student will learn factories act and other legislation related to 
Industrial safety. Also, it will provide the OSHA, National and International conventions, 
including ILO.  
 
 Course Content : ILO convention and recommendation, manufacture storage and import 
of hazardous chemical rules, 1989, Factories act and rules, OHSAS, 18001, national 
policy on occupational safety  health and environment at workplace, the factories act, 
1948, air (prevention & control of poll ution)  act, 1981 and amended, 1986, water 
(prevention & control of  pollution) act, 1974 an rules, Indian explosive act,  Indian 
petroleum act and rules, Environmental pollution act, Indian Electricity act and rules,  
workmen’s compensation acts, 1923, th e employee’s state insurance act, 1948, the 
mines act, 1952 and rules, the dockworkers act, 1986 and the dockworkers regulations, 
1990, Employees’ Compensation Act,  Explosives Act, Water Act and Air Act, Overview 
of ISO45001 and ISO 14000, OISD guidelines , Contract Labor Act and Central Rules - 
Registration of Establishments, Licensing of Contractors, Welfare and Health provisions 
in the Act and the Rules, Penalties, Rules regarding wages.  
 
 Mode of conduct : The course will have lectures, case studies and g roup discussion. The 
course project will be designed based on various scenarios and presentation will be 
evaluated. In addition,   there will be quiz.  
  
References:  Academic Affairs Advisory 5 8 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 6 of 10 i. Factories Act, 1948.  
ii. Explosives Act and related Rules.  
iii. Petroleum Act and Rules.  
iv. Environme ntal Acts & relevant Rules  
 
7. Industrial Hygiene Occupational Safety [40 h of Engagement]  
 
 Course Objective : The course will expose the students to industrial exposure and its 
health effects. The student will be able to analyse  physical, chemical and biological 
hazards associated with occupational health and maintain industrial hygiene.    
 Course Content : Physical Hazards, Chemical hazards, Biological and Ergonomic 
hazards, Occupational health and toxicology, Occupational physi ology, Threshold Limit 
Value (TLV), Hazards of VOC’s and control measures, Biological indicators of chemical 
dosage and monitoring, Body defense mechanism to toxicant exposure -  membrane 
defenses and non -membrane defenses, Occupational and work -related di seases, 
Notifiable occupational diseases and its effects and prevention. Industrial toxicology. 
Local and systemic effects. Chronic and acute effects. Chemical hazards: dust, fume, gas 
etc. Recognition of chemical hazards. Controlled work environment, prev ention and 
mitigation of accidental chemical releases, General methods for the control of airborne 
hazards, dilution ventilation, Local exhaust ventilation, monitoring, and troubleshooting of 
existing ventilation systems, personal protective clothing, resp iratory protection.  
 Mode of Conduct : The course will have lectures, case studies and group discussion. 
The course project will be designed based on various scenarios and presentation will be 
evaluated. In addition, there will be quizzes / semester exam.  
 References:  
i. Patty’s Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology, Volume III, Lewis J. Cralley & Lester V. 
Cralley, Second edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1985.  
ii. Chemical Process Safety: Fundamentals with applications, Daniel A. Crowl, Joseph F. 
Louvar, Upper Saddle River, NJ Prentice Hall 2011  
iii. Fundamentals of Industrial Hygiene by Barbara A. Plog and Patricia J. Quinlan, 6th 
Edition, National Safety Council, USA, 2012.  
 
8. Electrical and Maintenance Safety [40 h of engagement]  
 
 Course Objective : The course will cover the fundamentals of electrical safety and safety 
during maintenance work in the industry. The student will be able to assess electrical and 
maintenance risks associated with various areas of the industry and plan mitigation 
strategies.  
  
 Course Cont ent: Static charge, charge accumulation, energy from electrostatic 
discharges, electrostatic ignition sources,  electrostatic voltage drops, charged 
capacitors, controlling static electricity, design consideration to prevent electrostatic 
ignitions,  elect rical safety hazards, safety precautions of various electrical devices, 
grounding, protection system using fuse, circuit breakers and overload relays, overload 
and short circuit protection -no load protection, earth fault protection, grounding -
equipment, sa fety in handling hand held electrical appliances tools and medical 
equipments. Electrical safety in extreme weather conditions, protection from dirt & water 
as IEC standard, electrical hazard and statutory requirements, overview of Indian 
Electricity rules  of safety, standard safety procedures for electrical equipment, 
classification of hazardous zones -intrinsically safe and explosion -proof electrical Academic Affairs Advisory 5 8 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 7 of 10 apparatus (IS, API and OSHA standard);  Safety in operation and maintenance of 
equipment at the constructi on site, risk associated with construction and maintenance 
work, access and working in confined space, works at height, plant maintenance, 
modification and emergency planning; reliability engineering and OEM management.   
  
 Mode of conduct : The course wil l have lectures and followed by case studies and group 
discussion. Students are going to do solve problems through assignments. The course 
will have quizzes and semester exam.  
 
 References:  
i. Electrical Safety Handbook, 4th Edition, John Cadick, Mary Capel li-Schellpfeffer, 
Dennis Neitzel, Al Winfield, McGraw -Hill Education, (2012)  
ii. Principles of Electrical Safety (IEEE Press Series on Power and Energy Systems), 
Peter E. Sutherland, Wiley -IEEE Press (2015)  
iii. Industrial Safety and Maintenance Management, M.P. Poonia, S.C. Sharma, Khanna 
Publishing House (2018)  
 
9. Industrial Accident Investigation and Forensics [20 h of engagement]  
 
 Course Objective : The course will provide basic strategy to investigate industrial 
accidents and various forensic techniques to eval uate the cause of incidents. Analyzing 
various data and preparing investigation report.  
 
 Course Content : Incident reporting, Accident investigations, route cause analysis, 
Learning from accidents,  Investigation process, Interviewing and analysis techniq ues, 
team and planning, workflow and stages in an accident/incident investigation, loss 
pattern, collection of evidence, Interviewing the person(s) involved and witnesses, type 
of injury and illness, causality, site visit and critical observations, recogni tion of evidence 
and organize the evidence, time and event sequence, cause and analysis, human factor, 
Pre and post -accident management, analysis of organizational safety culture, 
documentation, Investigation summary,  diagnosis aids, Fires, explosions and  sources of 
ignition, Pressure effects, medical evidence, aids for recommendations, developing the 
recommendation, ethical issues and insurance aspects, Case studies, Use of risk 
assessment methods in the investigation  
 
 Mode of conduct : The course will have lectures and followed by case studies and group 
discussion. Students are going to do QRA and solve problems through assignments. The 
course will have quizzes and semester exam.  
 
 References:  
i. Accident Investigation Techniques: Basic  Theories, Analytical Methods, and 
Applications, Jeffrey S. Oakley, Amer Society of Safety Engineers (2003)  
ii. Accidents: Causes, Investigation and Prevention, James Thornhill, Ingram short title 
(2011)  
iii. Modern Accident Investigation and Analysis, 2nd Edition,  Ted S. Ferry, Wiley (2007)  
 
10. Sustainable Environment [20 h of Engagement]  
 
 Course Objective : The students will be exposed to environmental impact assessment 
and its implication for the environment and community. It will enable students to prepare 
mitigation and management plan, including rehabilitation.   
 Course Content : Environmental Impact As sessment (EIA) in project lifecycle and report Academic Affairs Advisory 5 8 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 8 of 10 preparation, legal and regulatory aspects, Impact identification and prediction, Prediction 
tools for EIA, Assessment of impacts – air, water, soil, noise, biological –– cumulative 
Impact Assessment. ISO 14000 , Social impact assessment and implication on 
community, communities in transition, environmental management plan, mitigation and 
rehabilitation plans, ethical and quality aspects of Environmental Impact Assessment, 
Case studies with examples from Air poll ution, Water pollution and Hazardous waste 
Management, Sustainability reporting  
 Mode of conduct : The course will have lectures and followed by case studies and group 
discussion. The course project will be designed to cover various aspects of sustainabilit y 
and used for evaluation. The assignment will be designed such that student can identify 
an area in their neighborhood and perform environmental impact assessment and present 
the findings in the class. In addition, there will be normal assignment and quiz zes.  
 
 References:  
i. Environmental Impact Assessment, Canter, L.W., McGraw Hill, New York. 1996  
ii. Environmental Impact Assessment – Practical solutions to recurrent problems, 
Lawrence, D.P., Wiley -Interscience, New Jersey. 2003  
 
11. Economics of Safety [20 h of Engagement]  
 
 Course Objective : The student will learn cost and economic aspects of safety. The 
course will provide perspective of productivity against cost of safety. The course will 
expose the student to various techniques to evaluate the cost of safety in various risk 
level.  
 
 Cour se Content : Productivity and Safety, Operational Risk, Operational Safety and 
Economics, Economic Assessment Techniques, Decision -making Processes for 
Investing in Safety, Safety Demand and Long -term Average Cost of Production, Safety 
Value Function, Expec ted Value Theory, Value at Risk, and Safety Attitude, Safety 
Utilities, Preferences of Safety Management – Safety Indifference Curves, Budget 
Constraint and n -Dimensional Maximization Problem Formulation, Safety and 
Profitability, Methods for influencing s afety level,  
 
 Mode of conduct : The course will have lectures and case studies and group discussion. 
Student will be evaluated based on Project and presentation which will be designed such 
that it involves identification of various accidents and cost evalu ation and economic 
aspect of the accident. In addition, there will be scenario based assignments and quizzes.  
 
 References:  
i. Cost-Benefit Analysis, Edited by Richard Layard  and Stephen Glaister, Cambridge 
University Press (1994)  
ii. The Economics of Safety and Physical Risk, Jones - Lee, Wiley –Blackwell (1989)  
iii. Preventing Industrial Accidents, Carsten Busch, Routledge (2021)  
iv. Operational Safety Economics by Genserik L. L. Reniers, H. R. Noel Van Erp, Wiley, 
(2016)  
 
  Academic Affairs Advisory 5 8 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 9 of 10 12. Emerging Technologies in Safety Engineering  [20 h of Engagement]  
 
 Course Objective : The student will learn various advanced technologies and its 
application in improving industrial safety. The course will explore the implementations of 
some of the advanced and emerging technologies and its benefit in safety applications to 
improve workp lace safety, including public safety in general.   
 
 Course Content : Mapping technology solutions for workplace safety, Overview of 
various technologies and its possible of application in Safety Engineering. Some of the 
technologies (but not limited) - Robotics and automation, wearables and smart PPE, 
Artificial intelligence, Machine Learning, Computer Vision, Deep Learning, Computational 
Photography, Real -time data analysis and process monitoring, Big Data and accident 
prediction,  Eye tracking in industri al operation, Virtual Reality, Sensor Technology, 
Various Simulators, GPS, Mobile and Drone technology, Real -time video feeds through 
5G and prediction on critical incidents, 5G facilitated information access and exchange 
for emergency responses.  
 
 Mode of conduct : The course will have lectures and case studies and group discussions. 
Experts from various technology will provide lectures and demonstrations (wherever 
possible). The student will be asked to prepare the project, followed by a presentation on 
the use case of different technologies for different safety solutions. The student will be 
evaluated based on the course project and presentation, including any prototype 
preparation. In addition, there will be assignments on applications of various 
techno logies.  
 
 References:  
i. Workplace Safety Futures: The impact of emerging technologies and platforms on work 
health and safety and workers’ compensation over the next 20 years, Horton J, 
Cameron A, Devaraj D, Hanson RT, Hajkowicz SA, CSIRO, Canberra (2018).  
ii. Safety Technology 2020: Mapping Technology Solutions for Reducing Serious Injuries 
and Fatalities in the Workplace, National Safety Council (2019).  
 
13. Behavioral Safety [20 h of Engagement]  
 
 Course Objective : The student will learn the impact of behavior on the industrial incident. 
The course will expose the student to various safe and unsafe behavior and its implication 
for industrial safety.  
 
 Course Content : Behaviors and attitudes, positive and negative reinforcement as well 
as antecedents, implementation of safe behavior program, behavior -based safety 
practices in industry, different roles and responsibilities among employee, factors cause 
incidents, the influence of behavior on incidents, unsafe acts an d unsafe conditions, 
behaviors and attitudes towards safety, the theory behavior modification, positive 
reinforcement, components of a behavioral safety program and the behavioral safety 
observation, implementation of behavior based safety practices.  
 Mode  of conduct : The course will have lectures and case studies and group discussion. 
Student will be evaluated based on Project and presentation which will be designed such 
that it involves identification of unsafe environments and come up with solutions (bas ed 
on behavioral aspects) to turn them into safe environments. In addition, there will be 
scenario based assignments and quizzes.  Academic Affairs Advisory 5 8 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 10 of 10  
 References:  
i. Behavioral Safety: A Framework for Success, Dominic Cooper, BSMS; 1st edition 
(September, 22, 2009)  
ii. A Definiti ve Guide to Behavioural Safety, Tim Marsh, Routledge, 2017  
iii. The Behavior -Based Safety Process: Managing Involvement for an Injury -Free Culture, 
Thomas R. Krause, Wiley; 2nd edition (1996)  
 
14. Two Capstone Projects on Safety Engineering [Semester/Module long 
Engagement: 8 Credits]  
 
 Course Objective : The project course will expose the student to solving a small problem 
by applying the fundamentals covered in various courses. It may require data 
generation/data collection, modeling, analysis, and hypothesis val idation.   
  
 Course Content : Students will work on various safety engineering topics and present at 
the semester's or module's end. They will meet faculty members separately during the 
semester for their project course. Students will also be encouraged to  use some lab 
facilities during their visit to the IITGN campus.  
 
 Mode of conduct: The student should be connected with faculty members for regular 
progress of the project through multiple discussion session throughout the semester. 
They should present th e progress and get evaluated during mid semester as well as end 
semester. In addition to the presentation, student should prepare a project report and 
submit the it before end semester evaluation.  
 
15. Writing & Leadership  
Course Objective : The student will develop professional writing skills and leadership 
qualities  
 
Course Content : Existing Institute course modules   
 
Mode of conduct : To be added  
 
References: To be added  INDIAN  INSTITUTE  OF TECHNOLOGY  GANDHINAGAR  
NORMS  FOR  TRAVEL  SUPPORT  TO STUDENTS  FOR ATTENDING  
INTERNATIONAL  CONFERENCES  
(Based  on the approval  of the 4th meeting  of the Board  of Governors  held  on 3rd 
September  2011)  
1. Full-time  students  [undergraduate/postgraduate]  invited  to participate  in International  
professional  society  meeting  / international  conferences  to present  their  research  work  
(carried  out at IIT Gandhinagar  in the stand  alone  or in an international  collaborative  
modes)  will be eligible  for financial   assistance  in  terms  of support  towards  registration  
fee and expenses  related  to visas,  airfares,  hotel  accommodation  and boarding  (food)  
expenses.  
 
2. The amounts  to be provided  for by way of financial  support  will be subject  to ceiling  as 
indicated  below:  
 
a) For undergraduate,  M.Sc,  M.A.  and M.Tech  students,  Rs. 60,000/ - for the entire  
duration  of their  education  programmes.  
 
b) For Ph.D.  students,  a maximum  of Rs. 2.0 lakhs  for the entire  duration  of the Ph.D.  
programme  [typically  3-5 years].  For each  conference  the financial  support  will be 
reimbursed  as per calculation  80%  of (A-B-C) or upto  maximum  sanctioned  amount,  
whichever  is less Where;  
A = Total  claim  amount (after  the visit)  as submitted  by the student  B = 
Amount  supported  by any external  agency  
C = Amount  committed  by their  supervisor  
 
3. Financial support given to PhD  students for : 
a) Overseas conferences (up to Rs.  2.0 lakhs) and  
b) Doing research in a foreign lab (up to $12500) will be contingent on students clearing 
the scientific writing certification. In exceptional cases, this requirement may be waived 
if a student cannot obtain the certification but can demonstrate enough evidence of 
having made an attempt to learn and impro ve his/her scientific writing capabilities. 
Waivers may be given by the Director upon recommendation of the Dean, Academic 
Affairs.  
 
4. A committee  comprising  Dean  (Academic  Programmes),  Dean  (Research  and 
Development),  and Dean  (Student  Affairs)  may  consider  applications  
supported/endorsed  by faculty  supervisors  and make  appropriate  recommendations  
within  the guidelines,  indicated  above.  
 5. All recipients  of such  Institutional  support  will be encouraged  to seek  additional  
support  from  other  funding  agencies,  and/or,  meet  a part of the expenditure  through  
personal  finances/loans.  The concerned  faculty  supervisors  may  also consider  
supporting  the students  partially  through  their  own  projects  or professional  
development  accounts.  
 
 
6. Besides  the financial  assistance  from  Institutional  resources  as per limits  indicated  
in2(a)  and 2(b) above,  the Institute  may  provide  additional  travel  funds  through  donor  
support  and from  project  funds.  
 
7. Swabhanu  Challenge  Grants  at IITGn  to Encourage  Excellence  In Undergraduate  
Research  (As approved  by the Director  and ratified  by the Senate  in its 15th meeting  
held  on 03rd January  2014)  is meant  for undergraduates  whose  research work  will be 
accepted  for presentation  and publication  in the proceedings  of an international  
conference  will be awarded  this challenge  grant.  An initial  annual  sum  of Rs. 60,000/ - 
will be disbursed  through  these  grants.  Students  awarded  ‘Swabhanu  Challenge  
Grants’  will receive  a certificate  and funds  to be used  towards  their  travel.  This grant  
will be funded  through  the ‘Sastry  Endowment  Fund’  set up by Prof.  Amru tur 
Anilkumar  at Vanderbilt  University  in Nashville,  Tennessee.  
Above  norms  do not necessarily  mean  that the Institute  is committed  to providing  full funding  
for students  to participate  in the mentioned  academic  activities.  The Institute  may  set a lower  
limit  for funding  or provide  partial  financial  support  on a case  to case  basis.  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR B.TECH -MSc DUAL DEGREE PROGRAMME  
(As approved by the BoG in its 24th meeting held on 27th July 2018)  
 
 
 
1. This program is intended to attract the Institute’s B.Tech . students  to its MSc programme 
and enable them to complete both the degrees in a reasonable duration.   
2. Eligibility and Selection Process  
● B.Tech students at IIT Gandhinagar may apply for a B .Tech  - MSc dual degree 
programme anytime  after completion of four semesters.  
● The students should have secured a minimum CPI of 6.0 at the time of application.  
● The students are free to apply to disciplines in which a regular M.Sc. programme 
exists.  
● The disciplines may recommend the discipline wi se eligibility criteria in advance and 
seek approval of Director through Dean, Academic Affairs.  
● Recommendations for conversion to dual degree programme will be made by a 
committee setup at the discipline in which the student wishes to pursue his/her M.Sc.  
Dean, Academic Affairs will examine the recommendation and place it along with 
his/her own comments or recommendations before the Director for a decision.  
 
3. Graduation Requirements and Norms  
● Students enrolled in the BTech -MSc dual degree programme have to earn a minimum 
of 72 credits, in addition to the credits counted towards their B .Tech degree 
requirements.  
● Students should obtain a minimum of 30 credits through core courses, a minimum of 
12 credits through elective courses and a minimum of 20 credits  through project work. 
A sample academic path is shown in Annexure I.  
● The open elective requirement in the B .Tech programme of the student may be 
reduced by 4 credits.  
● Single CPI will be maintained till the completion of all the requirements of both the 
degrees and two separate CPIs will be mentioned in the final transcript, based on the 
graduation claim made by the student. One CPI will be for all the courses claimed 
towards the B .Tech degree and another based on all credits earned towards the MSc 
degree.  
● The students may also opt for Honours in the same discipline and/or Minor(s) in other 
discipline(s) as part of their B .Tech degree by clearing the additional requisite  credits.  
● Pass/fail conversion will be allowed only for two courses during the entire period of 
the dual degree.  
● All other norms such as substitution of courses will be applicable separately for the 
courses counted towards B .Tech and MSc degrees.    
● If the student does not maintain a CPI of above 6.0, the student will be converted to 
the B .Tech programme.  
● The maximum duration of the dual degree programme will be seven years.   
4. Tuition fee: The students will deposit the tuition fee as per norms of the B .Tech 
programme until completion of the eighth semester and will pay fees as per norms of the 
MSc programme afterwards, till completion of all requirements for the award of both the 
degrees.  
 
5. Award of degrees: The student will be awarded separate B .Tech and MSc degrees after 
successfully completion all the requirements for the award of both the degrees.  
 
6. Exit options: The student may request to opt out of the dual degree programme at any 
point during the programme after giving valid reasons, and if the  request is approved, the 
student will be treated as in the B .Tech programme.  
   
Research and Development Advisory  07(Version 2.0, January 2013)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHONOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
INDUSTRY -ACADEMIC ASSOCIATESHIP  
 
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 7th meeting held on 23rdJune 2012 ) 
 
IIT Gandhinagar wishes to augment avenues for Institute -Industry interaction to facilitate 
collaborative research, development, and innovation activities through an Industry -Academic 
Associateship Scheme.  
 
Engineers/Managers/Experienced professionals from reputed Industries would be invited to 
engage in full time interaction with faculty and students at IITGn, for at least 20 (twenty) days in 
a year. During their tenure, these Associates would be expected to  
 interact with faculty members working in associated/overlapping areas of interest  
 identify and facilitate pursuit of Projects/Internships for students  
 deliver special lectures in areas of their expertise  
 identify areas/projects for collaborative pursuits, and,  
 contribute to curriculum development , laboratory upgradation and related activities  
 
The Industry -Academic Associates Scheme will provide for  
 to and fro air fares (by economy class)/ road/rail travel as per Institutional norms  
 rent free semi -furnished accommodation at IITGN Guest House  
 office space and access to library facilities  
 need based OPD facilities, and  
 a token honorarium  
 
The Industry -Academic Associateships will be offered based on the recommendations of the 
Standing Committee on faculty affairs. The Committee will scrutinize a nd assess nominations 
which should contain the CV of the nominee, and an outline of goals, activities, and plans for 
sustained collaborative linkages. Selections may be guided by criteria such as  
 the significance of the collaborative work  
 potential for stu dent and faculty engagement, and  
 the quality of the work anticipated, and the likelihood of the proposed objectives being 
achieved.  
 
The industry personnel invited under this scheme may be designated as Adjunct Professor. In 
case of exceptional credentials , the Standing Committee may also consider and recommend a 
title of Visiting Professor/Distinguished Professor to the candidate . The honorarium will be 
decided by the Standing Committee and is expected to range from Rs. 2000/ - to Rs. 4000/ - per 
day at the present time.  This range will be revised by the Standing Committee from time to time.  
 
The Scheme will be reviewed after five years’ operatin g experience.  
  
Research and Development Advisory 04(Version 2.0, January 2013)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
INDUSTRY -SUPPORTED B .TECH PROJECTS  
 
Synopsis:  
Industry -supported B .Tech projects are projects undertaken by our B .Tech  students (typically as 
part of final year project running over one or two semesters) for which the problem statement 
and a nominal financial support comes from an industrial partner.  
Industry -supported BTech projects have several advantages:  
 Build relatio nships and develop effective communications between industry and IITGN  
 Get to know faculty who has expertise in areas relevant to the industrial partner  
 Provides an avenue for trying high risk projects at a very low cost with potential for high 
payoff if t he project is successful  
 Contribute to technical education in the country by helping train industry -responsive 
students  
 Can be a useful recruitment tool; the concerned students may be enthused with the 
project enough to consider career with the industrial partner  
These industry -supported BTech projects are structured as follows:  
 Project/problem definition comes from the industry partner, typically small projects or 
problems that the industry partners are very interested in solving but do not have the 
time t o solve.  
 The industry partner is charged a nominal fee of Rs. 50,000 per project per year. This 
fee helps build accountability and self -esteem of the student.  
 The money thus collected will be pooled. After appropriate project expenses are 
subtracted, the remaining portion will be used to foster excellence by students and 
faculty (roughly in equal proportions).  
 This  fee is structured such that even if one out of 10 projects is successful, it will be a 
good value for money for the industrial partner.  
 Indus try personnel will be accessible to the students for any clarifications or advice on 
the project.  
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 09 (Version 3.0, September  2023)                                   Page 1 of 2 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 FACULTY DESIGNATIONS APPOINTED THROUGH STANDING 
COMMITTEE   
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 3rd meeting held on 7th January 2011 , in its 26th 
meeting held on 01 March 2019  and in its 38th meeting held on 05 September 2023 ) 
 
 
The Board of Governors  in its 38th meeting held on 05 September 2023  approved the 
following designations, other than these of regular faculty, to be appointed by the Standing 
Committee for Faculty Affairs . 
 
1. Visiting  Faculty - Visiting Assistant Professor, Visiting Associate Professor, Visiting 
Professor, and Visiting Faculty: These roles encompass full -time faculty members 
engaged through a consolidated honorarium or salary arrangement. This includes 
individuals who have retired from other academic institutions as well as foreign nationals. 
Faculty members on deputation, leave, or sabbatical leave from other institutions may 
also hold these designations, with compensation either on a pay scale or in a 
consolidated for m. 
 
2. Adjunct Faculty - Adjunct Assistant Professor, Adjunct Associate Professor, Adjunct 
Professor, and Adjunct Faculty: These appointments pertain to faculty members primarily 
involved in part -time teaching at IIT Gandhinagar. Such individuals may concu rrently 
hold positions elsewhere on either a part -time or full -time basis, engage in professional 
practice, or be in retirement. All Adjunct appointments are accompanied by honorarium, 
which can be on a monthly, daily, or hourly basis.  
 
3. Guest Faculty - Guest Professor, Guest Associate Professor, Guest Assistant Professor, 
and Guest Faculty: This category involves faculty members invited to spend a designated 
number of days each year at IIT Gandhinagar. During these visits, they contribute to short -
term t eaching, research, and related academic activities. Compensation is provided on a 
per-day and/or activity basis, in accordance with mutual convenience.  
 
4. Distinguished Honorary Professor - Esteemed academics and prominent professionals are 
extended invit ations to spend a specified number of days each year at IIT Gandhinagar. 
Their contributions encompass teaching, research guidance, mentoring, fostering research 
collaborations, networking, and more. Compensation is on a daily basis . 
 
5. Teaching Faculty - Assistant Teaching Professor, Associate Teaching Professor, and 
Teaching Professor: Faculty members primarily dedicated to teaching and teaching -
related activities, such as curriculum development and enhancing teaching laboratories. 
Ph.D. qualification is  not mandatory, and appointments are accompanied by 
consolidated salaries/ honorarium.  
 
6. Research Faculty - Assistant Research Professor, Associate Research Professor, and 
Research Professor: Faculty members with research as their primary responsibility,  
including research execution and the establishment of research infrastructure. A Ph.D. 
may or may not be required, but substantial research experience is essential. 
Appointments come with consolidated salaries/ honorarium.  
 
7.  Faculty of Practice - Professor of Practice, Associate Professor of Practice, and 
Assistant Professor of Practice/ Faculty of Practice: These roles are crafted to enrich the 
breadth and quality of educational offerings across various fields, including Engineering, 
Sciences, Hum anities, Business, Law, and more.  
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 09 (Version 3.0, September  2023)                                   Page 2 of 2 
 8.  Lecturer: Individuals who may or may not hold a Ph.D. but contribute significantly to 
teaching. Their appointments are accompanied by consolidated salaries/ honorarium.  
 
9. Academic Staff -in-Residence – The Institute offers an Academic Staff -in-Residence 
program, inviting individuals with exceptional achievements as educators, researchers, 
scholars, or artists etc. to reside at the institution for durations ranging from one month to 
a full year. This initiative aims to  foster a dynamic intellectual environment, promote 
knowledge exchange, and further enhance the academic and creative pursuits of both 
the participants and the institute's community. Academic Staff -in-Residence program has 
already been implemented in two c ategories as: Scholars -In-Residence and Artist -In-
Residence.  
 
a) Scholars -in-Residence – The Scholars -in-Residence program at IIT Gandhinagar 
involves active engagement of scholars of various fields with the institution's faculty 
and students in alignment with specific objectives and activities for the designated 
period. These scholars are encouraged to share their ongoing work through 
institutional seminars and public lectures. The program's terms of appointment were 
approved in the 7th meeting of the Boar d held on 23 June 2012.  
 
b) Artist -in-Residence – The Artist -In-Residence program at IIT Gandhinagar offers 
artists the chance to participate in or guide projects alongside community members 
within their respective fields of expertise. This initiative aims  to integrate artists into 
the institution's distinctive culture and encourage interdisciplinary community 
involvement. Artists -In-Residence are typically expected to spend a minimum of four 
weeks at the Institute. The terms of appointment for the Artist -In-Residence program 
were approved in the 33rd meeting of the Board held on 15 November 2021.  
 
The Standing Committee for Faculty Affairs will continue to take decisions regarding these 
temporary appointments for a period up to two years and the terms and c onditions of 
appointment including emoluments/honoraria wherever specific approval of the Board is not 
there. However, all such appointments will be reported to the Board.  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
REVISED NORMS FOR GUIDED PROGRESS SCHEME FOR BTECH STUDENTS  
 
(As approved by the Senate in its 18th meeting held on 25th September 2014, updated in the 
23rd meeting held on 16th March 2016, 33rd Senate meeting held on 22nd November,  2018 , 
53rd meeting held on 27th July 2021, and 57th meeting held on 12th April 2022 ) 
The Guided Progress Scheme (GPS) was introduced in 2014 to help academically weak B.Tech. 
students develop and follow a plan for graduation from the  Institute. The GPS primarily involves 
restriction of the number of credits a student can register during a semester, and mapping of 
students to an advisor, who advises them on the academic trajectory that should be followed. The 
Senate in its 18th Meeting  held on 25th September 2014 has approved revised norms for Guided 
Progress Scheme (GPS) applicable to all B.Tech students with effect from Semester -I of 
Academic Year 2014 -15. These norms have been updated  several times  in subsequent Senate 
meetings, deta ils of which are placed below:  
 
A. For B.Tech . students admitted earlier than 2020:  
Entry (on recommendation of the SAPEC):  
 Students who do not get a passing grade in a minimum of 14 credits in the first semester 
will be placed in GPS for the subsequent semester. The credits for Foundation Programme 
will not be considered in this  count.  
 Students who do not get a passing grade in a minimum of 16 credits in the second, third 
or fourth semester will be placed in GPS for the next  semester.  
 After the first four semesters, students who do not receive passing grades in a minimum 
of 32 credits in two consecutive semesters will be placed in GPS while keeping in mind 
the course offerings in that semester and pending graduation  requirements.  
 In general, the studen ts will be considered for entry into GPS up to their sixth semester. 
After the sixth semester, only those students who have been in GPS in any previous 
semesters will be considered to continue or enter into  GPS.  
 
While in GPS:  
 Students will not be permitte d to register for more than 21 credits in a  semester.  
 Students will prepare their study plan in consultation with both, their GPS and Faculty 
Advisor while keeping in mind course offerings and  timelines.  
 Students under GPS must register for their backlog c ourses before registering for other 
courses in that semester. However, GPS and Faculty Advisors may recommend 
exceptions to avoid cascading  effects.  
 Class attendance, assignment submission and performance on various assessments will 
be regularly monitored by GPS and Faculty  Advisors.  
 
Exit (on recommendation of the SAPEC):  
 If a student gets a passing grade in at least 18 registered credits in a semester with a 
minimum SPI of 6.0,  OR 
 If a student successfully earns 16 credits or more in each of two consecutive  semesters.  
  B. For B.Tech.  students admitted in Academic Year 2020 -21 onwards:  
Entry (on recommendation of the SAPEC):  
 
 Students who are not able to secure a CPI of 5.0 or above at the end of first two semesters/ 
Term III will be placed in GPS .  
 Students who have a CPI between 5.0 and 5.5, but would like to seek help through the GPS 
support mechanisms, would be allowed to enter GPS.  
 
While in GPS  
 
 While in GPS, students will prepare their academic plan in consultation with both their GPS 
and faculty advisors.  
 The exact academic load of students in GPS would be decided based on the 
recommendations of the GPS advisor and the faculty advisor. At any p oint of time, students 
will not be able to register for fewer than 12 credits and more than 24 credits in a semester.  
 
Exit (on recommendation  of the SAPEC):  
  
 Students will be able to exit the GPS when they are able to secure a CPI of 5.5 or a passing 
grade in at least 18 registered credits in a semester with a minimum SPI of 6.0.  
 
 
Any exceptions to these norms may be recommended by the SAPEC and approved by the 
Chairman,  Senate.   
General Administration Advisory  10 (Version 1.0, January 2014)                                 Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
SAFETY OF CONSTRUCTION WORKERS  
 
Background:  
1. There is a wide -spread concern about lack of safety awareness and culture in India, 
and far too many deaths and injuries take place in India that can be easily avoided.  
2. Construction work by its very nature is prone to accidents and it should be the 
endeavour of everyone to ensure that all workers at the site follow strict safety norms 
for their own safety and that of their co -workers. However, this is not often the case,  
resulting in a number of avoidable accidents at our construction sites.  
3. Accidents in an academic campus pose additional challenges. The community of 
students and faculty tend to be very sensitive and accident(s) at construction site of 
an academic institu te can have disproportionate consequences in terms of internal 
dynamics of the institute and on the construction activity.  
4. IITGN greatly values dignity for all and makes extraordinary efforts to sensitize our 
students towards societal issues. Hence, the I nstitute must ensure that all 
constructions in its own campus meet the highest safety standards. Else, we will be 
seen by our own students as “preaching but not practicing”.  
5. Most Central Government funded institutions such as IITGN either get their work 
done through CPWD or follow the CPWD manuals and norms for the construction 
works. CPWD has very specific requirements on construction safety in its contracts. 
For instance, the “General Conditions of Contract” for the CPWD works contains the 
CPWD Safety Cod e running over 5 pages. However, it is rare to find such stringent 
conditions being implemented on our construction sites.  
 
Strategy:  
 
6. IITGN has work ed with CPWD to incorporate some Special Conditions  in the 
contracts for the IITGN works. The following gi ves a  general  sense of such Special 
Conditions:  
a. The contractor must  employ a Safety Manager and two Safety Supervisors, 
who is responsible for developing safety programs, training, implementation 
and propagating safety culture. Failure to do so will attra ct a specified per -day 
financial penalty on the contractor.  
b. A Safety Monitoring Committee has been  formed consisting of 
representatives of the contractor, subcontractors  (if any), CPWD and IITGN 
with the mandate to monitor and achieve the objectives of co nstruction safety 
continuously, progressively and through effective actions. The Committee 
must meet regularly and its proceedings must be received by IITGN 
administration within a week of the meeting.  
c. All workers must undergo safety training (to be impar ted by the Safety 
Manager of the contractor) for two to three days before they can be allowed to 
enter into the construction areas. Thereafter, a regular schedule of refresher 
workshops on safety will be maintained by the Safety Manager.  
d. Any workers found within the construction site without safety gadgets (as per 
occupation) shall have to pay a fine (say Rs 100 to Rs 200) per count of  
General Administration Advisory  10 (Version 1.0, January 2014)                                 Page 2 
 default and shall be barred from the site for one day. For all such defaults, the 
contractor shall also pay a matching amou nt as a fine. Money thus collected 
will be utilized for supporting welfare programmes for the workers.  
 
7. IITGN itself  has engage d a Safety Officer,  in order to ensure that the contractors and 
the CPWD are indeed implementing all the safety procedures effec tively. This is 
similar to the Security Advisor at IITGN (a retired police officer) who ensures that the 
security agency and their personnel are functioning as appropriate and periodically 
conducts surprise checks and imposes fines on the security agency f or violations.  
 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR PASS/FAIL OPTION AND SUBSTITUTION OF COURSES   
 
(As approved by Senate in its 15th meeting held on 03 January 2014 and  
in its 66th meeting held on 16 October 2023)  
 
It is felt important to encourage students to explore courses in areas in which they have little 
background and promote additional learning among the students through courses beyond 
minimum graduation requirements. It will be useful to have provisions against decline in overall 
performance  indices of the students. In view of this, the Senate approved the following 
provisions in the curriculum of all  programmes.  
 
A. PASS/FAIL OPTION IN  COURSES  
1. A student can submit request to convert his/her earlier registered course(s) with 
passing grade(s) to Pass/Fail option. Each student will have this option available for a 
maximum of two courses for conversion during the entire programme. The course 
tagged with this option will be dropped from CPI  calculation.  
2. BTech students can use this option any time after completing two years into the 
programme. The students in other programmes can use this option any time after their 
first semester into the programme.  
B. REPEATING/SUBSTITUTING  COURSES  
1. A student can repeat a compulsory course or a particular elective cou rse to improve 
his/her understanding of the subject as well as his/her CPI, irrespective of his/her 
performance in the earlier attempt. Better of the two grades will be counted towards 
CPI calculation and only the best grade obtained will be shown on the A cademic 
Transcript.   
2. Courses, which are counted towards graduation requirements, with fail grades will not 
be shown on the Academic Transcript, if a passing grade is obtained by a student later 
by repeating the course, i.e. only the final grade which is us ed for calculation of the 
CPI will be mentioned in the Academic Transcript.   
3. A student can substitute one elective course by another elective course to improve 
his/her CPI, irrespective of his/her performance in the earlier course. Given the 
provision of P roficiency Transcript, substitution need not be declared by the student a-
priori  and the student may select courses to appear in Proficiency and Academic 
transcripts at any point of time and definitely before claiming the completion of 
graduation requireme nts.  
4. The grades of all attempts for courses which are repeated or substituted will however 
be shown in the semester grade report and will be used in the calculation of the 
corresponding SPIs.  
 
The scheme  will be effective for all the students admitted in 2013 batch and afterwards. 
However, the provisions on repeating/substituting courses may be allowed to students that 
were admitted prior to 2013 batch students on case to case basis by Dean (Academic Affairs).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Academic Affairs Advisory 24 (Version 2.0, October  2023 ) Page 1  Faculty Affairs Advisory 15 (Version 4.0, March 2024) Page 1 of 2 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS ON TRAVEL SUPPORT TO FACULTY FROM EXCELLENCE FUND  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its ninth meeting held on 28 March 2013  and  
39th meeting held on 19 January 2024 ) 
 
Considering its aspirational research agenda, the Institute must encourage very active 
participation of its faculty members in international activities. Our faculty colleagues 
should be able to present their work to a larger international audience and develop 
collaborative research. We must recognize that most of our faculty members are 
relatively young in their career at present and will take some time to setup their research 
facilities and to have some tangible outputs for a number of publications. Hence, the 
need for additional encouragement and facilitation is most critical at this juncture.  
 
The following norms have been arrived at with the above context in mind. It is 
understood that these norms will be reviewed and revised periodically to meet the needs 
of changed circumstances as the Institute grows and as the experience is gained on 
implementation of this scheme.  
 
1. A career faculty member of the Institute who has published at least two journal 
papers during the two calendar years prior to the date of event/activity will be eligible 
for travel support under this scheme. Those journal papers must be:  
(a)  Published in a journal listed on the ISI Web of Science.  
(b)  Must list the affiliation of the concerned faculty member as IIT Gandhinagar in 
an unambiguous manner.  
2. In some areas (such as humanities and social sciences), it may be more appropriate 
for the faculty members to publish their research elsewhere (and not in the journals 
listed on ISI Web of Science). Should a faculty member feel that his/her work 
published elsewhere should be considered for the travel support, he/ she may seek 
a case -by-case exemption from the requirement of clause 1(a) above.  
3. This financial assistance can support the expenses related to visas, conference 
registration fee, air tickets, travel insurance and per diem for attending a conference/ 
workshop/ meeting. The assistance can also be provided for collaborative research 
activity .  
4. The amount to be provided by way of financial support under this scheme will be 
subject to ceiling of Rs. 2.00 lakh per year. The Dean/Professor -in-charge (Faculty 
Affairs) will consider the request and make a recommendation to the Director for 
approval.   
5. In addition to the above, Standing Committee (on faculty affairs) may approve the 
following travel assistance on merit of the case:  
(a)  Faculty members who work in theoretical areas but with very active research 
profile may be granted an additional support of upto Rs 1.00 lakh in a year. The 
criteria for theoretical areas include (i) where it is difficult to seek significant 
external sponsored research funds, and (ii) where faculty member does not Faculty Affairs Advisory 15 (Version 4.0, March 2024) Page 2 of 2 
 seek significant laboratory / computational resources from the Institute for his/  
her research.  
(b)  Faculty members deeply engaged in “institution building” activity may be 
provided an additional support to the extent of Rs 1.00 lakh in a year. Further, 
in their case, the requirement of para 1 may be relaxed if deemed appropriate 
by the Standing Committee.  
6.   Expenditure on this scheme will be covered from the “Excellence Funds” as 
approved by the Board of Governors from time to time, such as donations, interest 
income of the endowment, and overheads and savings of the projects.   
7. The scheme is proposed to be implemented with immediate effect.  
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, December 2021)                                      Page 1 of 2 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
LEAVE TO FACULTY MEMBERS ON FOREIGN SERVICE TERMS  
(As approved by the BoG in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021)  
 
Faculty members in the IIT system often take up remunerative positions at other 
places within India or abroad for a limited duration, while maintaining lien at their 
home Institution on foreign service terms. Such opportunities can be very valuable 
for gro wth and development of the faculty members who will learn from diverse 
organizations and bring useful experience and ideas back to the Institute.  
 
In order to ensure consistency and transparency, the Board of Governors of the 
Institute in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021 approved the following norms 
for the Institute for administration of leave or deputation to the academic staff on 
foreign service terms .  
 
1. A faculty member may avail a short (up to one semester) or a long (two or more 
semesters) le ave on foreign service terms.  
2. A faculty member can accumulate one semester of leave on foreign service 
terms in their Leave on Foreign Service Terms Account (LFSTA) for every two 
years of service at the Institute (including periods of sabbatical leave).  
3. The maximum duration for the leave on foreign service terms will be usually 
equal to the leave balance in LFSTA. However, in case of important National or 
International assignments, appointment as Head of prestigious Institutions in 
India or abroad, etc., t he duration may be same as the term of the appointment, 
e.g., 3 or 5 years.    
4. A maximum of 20% of career faculty in a discipline can be on leave on foreign 
service terms at any point of time.  
5. One will be eligible for the first short leave on foreign serv ice terms, after 
completion of three years or more of continuous service with the Institute as a 
faculty member. Similarly, the minimum eligibility for the first long leave on 
foreign service terms will be five years or more of continuous service with the 
Institute as a faculty member. The period spent at IITGN as a faculty on 
contract, or leave from another institute or deputation may be counted.   
6. The period of leave on foreign service terms should be aligned with the semester 
system at IIT Gandhinagar, s uch that one does not miss more than one semester 
of teaching in case of short leave on foreign service terms and not more than four 
semesters in case of a two -year leave, etc. Thus, if someone avails of a leave on 
foreign service terms from October 1 (mid dle of the semester) to March 31 
(middle of the next semester), it will be treated as a long leave of two semesters 
on foreign service terms (and not a short leave on foreign service terms even 
though the person was away for only six months) for the above purposes . 
7. The duration of leave on foreign service terms will not be counted for the purpose 
of probation confirmation (at all levels) and for consideration of pay upgrade for 
Assistant Professors from Level 12 to Level 13A1 , i.e., the clock will stop during 
the leave on foreign service terms. However, the leave period will be counted for 
estimating the experience for pay upgrade to HAG level or change of position 
(e.g., from Assistant to Associate Professorship). They may be  considered for 
pay upgrade to the HAG level or can apply for consideration to a higher position 
at the Institute while they are availing the leave on foreign service terms.   
8. Depending on the nature of assignment during the leave period, faculty 
members a vailing leave on foreign service terms may be allowed to manage Faculty Affairs Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, December 2021)                                      Page 2 of 2 
 their externally funded projects, submit reports to their sponsors, guide thesis 
students, etc. However, this is at discretion of the Institute so as to ensure that 
this is not likely to put t he Institute in a difficulty with respect to a sponsoring 
agency or with respect to progress of the students in thesis.  Prior arrangements 
must be made for teaching/student guidance responsibilities and management 
of sponsored projects in consultation with  the concerned Deans and approved 
by the Director.  
9. During leave on foreign service terms, faculty members will not be paid salary 
and allowances by the Institute. Employer contributions to NPS will also not be 
paid by the Institute during the leave period.  However, faculty members are 
expected to make their contribution for Group Insurance Scheme.  
10. Even though the faculty member is not drawing salary from the Institute, they 
will continue to be eligible for usual increments in the pay scale during the leave 
period, i.e., on their return from leave, the salary will be fixed taking into 
consideration increments due during the leave period.  
11. Depending on the nature of assignment during the leave period, faculty 
members may be allowed to use funds available in th eir CPDA/PDA for 
reasonable professional activities during the period of leave. This will however 
be at discretion of the Institute and not a right of the faculty member. The 
Institute will not add funds to the CPDA for the period of the leave.  
12. Faculty mem bers holding Chair positions may continue to occupy the Chair 
position for leave up to three years. However, the honorarium and the 
contributions made towards professional development associated with the Chair 
position will not be paid during the leave per iod.  
13. If member of the Senate, the faculty members on leave on foreign service terms 
may not participate in the Senate meetings.   
14. Faculty members availing short leave on foreign service  terms may retain the 
housing allotted to them on campus on usual payments.  
15. The faculty member availing long leave may retain housing allotted to them on 
campus on usual payments for up to two years if they are leaving family behind. 
In case family is not  staying in the campus housing, all the belongings may be 
locked in one room of the apartment, the rest of the apartment may be cleared 
and the key of the apartment is to be handed over to the estate office. The 
Institute may use those apartments until the  return of the faculty member from 
the leave. The faculty member must fully vacate the housing in the campus 
beyond the two years.  
16. They may retain the allotted office at the Institute when on short leaves and for 
two years in case of long leave on foreign service terms. The office needs to be 
vacated beyond two years.  
17. Faculty and dependent family members will not be eligible for medical benefits 
(including any reimbursements) from the Institute during the leave period. 
However, as a courtesy, the Institute  may allow them to avail minimal OPD 
services at the Institute medical centre. The faculty members and dependent 
family members may also avail other social amenities in the Institute campus, 
such as sports facilities, etc., during the leave period.   
18. All the above -mentioned norms will be also applicable in the case of deputation 
on foreign service terms.  
19. The Standing Committee on Faculty Affairs will be authorized to waive any of 
the above conditions in exceptional cases in connection with leave or 
deputati on on foreign service terms. Such waivers should be recorded in the 
minutes of the Standing Committee and reported to the Board.  
 Academic Affairs Advisory 07 (Version 3.0, Dec 2023) Page 1  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR ACADEMIC CALENDAR, QUADS, SUBMISSION OF GRADES  AND DROPPING OF COURSES   (As approved by Senate in its 4th meeting held on 2nd December 2010, updated in the  27th/30th/63rd/66th/67th meetings of the Senate)  1) The two semesters in a year shall be referred to as Semester I and Semester II. The mid semester breaks should preferably be around Dussehra and Holi festivals, in order to minimize absence of students from classes due to these festivals. However, if in a certain year, Dussehra / Holi fall too far away from the middle of the semester, the mid-semester break may be placed near the middle of the semester. 2) The Institute also offers half-semester courses as well as courses in quads (a quarter of a semester, which is usually around 3.5 weeks), which can be credited by students.  3) Each regular semester is divided into four quads, namely Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4, and courses could be offered as follows: § Full semester courses starting from Q1 and ending at the end of Q4 § Half semester courses in Q1/Q2 or Q2/Q3 or Q3/Q4 § Quad courses in Q1 or Q2 or Q3 or Q4 4) Examinations are be scheduled for quad courses offered in Q1 or Q2 during the Examination I as per the academic calendar and for quad courses offered in Q3 or Q4 during the Examination II. Similarly, examinations are be scheduled for half semester courses offered in Q1/Q2 during the Examination I as per the academic calendar and half semester courses offered in Q2/Q3 or Q3/Q4 during Examination II. If a student registers only for one quad during any given semester, a maximum of five credits will be permitted. 5) Final grades are to be submitted within 96 hours of completion of Examination II of a particular course [or 96 hours from the end of a course, whichever is earlier]. In case of abnormal grading, some moderation of grades may be necessary. These cases may be flagged to the Chairman, Senate on a case-to-case basis by Dean (AA). 6) The Academic Calendar sets a date, normally two weeks after the commencement of the semester, for Course Adjustment. On or before this date, a student is permitted to make adjustments in her/his academic load by addition or deletion of one or more courses, projects etc., provided the total credits do not exceed the overload rule or fall below underload limits credits, by such adjustments. Course adjustment has to be done via IMS, in consultation with the Faculty Advisor. 7) A student may drop one or more course(s) out of the registered ones up to 7 days before the commencement of Examination II or 7 days before the end of a quad for quad courses. Such requests must be made with proper justification and will be approved by the Dean of Academic Affairs on recommendation of the Faculty Advisor.  The following implementation plan will be adhered to: a) In case the student faces difficulty in some course, he/she should first discuss with the instructor and faculty adviser. For genuine difficulties he/she may apply for dropping the course within two weeks after mid-semester recess, by mentioning the reason and getting consent of the Instructor and FA. Academic Affairs Advisory 07 (Version 3.0, Dec 2023) Page 2  b) The provision of dropping a course until one week before Examination II will be available only for rare cases under unavoidable conditions. Such requests will be expected to enclose additional sheet of detailed explanation with endorsement from Faculty Advisor and GPS Advisor if applicable. c) Unless the request is approved, the student must keep on attending the classes/activities and follow up with academic office in case of any confusion. Merely submitting the application is not considered approved.  8) Course/s dropped by a student may be taken during a subsequent semester or during the summer term (if offered). A student may be required to drop a course at any stage if there is a clash in the student’s time table preventing him/her from attending the course, or if s/he is found not entitled to register for that course for any other reason.   Faculty Affairs Advisory 2 1 (version 2.0, September 2021) Page 1 of 2 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAG AR 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF KAN CHAN AND HARILAL DOS HI CHAIR  
(As approved by the BoG in its 24th meeting held on 27 July 2018  and  
in its 32nd meeting held on 20 August 2021 ) 
 
In pursuance of the MoU signed between the donor  (Mr. Navin Doshi and his wife 
Mrs. Pratibha Doshi ), IITGN Foundation in the US and IITGN, the Board of 
Governors of the Institute in its 24th meeting held on 27 July 2018 has approved to 
establish ‘Kanchan and Harilal Doshi Chair’ with the terms and procedure for 
appointment to the Chair as provided below.  
 
Background:   
The donors Mr. Navin Doshi and Mrs. Pratibha Doshi of Los Angeles, California have 
set up this Chair in honour of parents of Mr Navin Doshi, Smt Kanchan and                
Sri Harilal Doshi. The Chair is meant to support research at IITGN on water 
purification and sanitation problems, including potential desalination solutions to 
harvest ocean water considering that the country has a vast coastline. The Chair is 
expected to identify and  initiate research and develop cost -effective and sustainable 
technologies/solutions for water purification and sanitation.  
 
The Kanchan and Harilal Doshi Chair is a Chair which is focused entirely on a 
research area.  
 
Procedure for Appointment : 
The Chair will be open to external and internal candidates and at all levels (Assistant 
Professor, Associate Professor, and Professor). Further , the C hair will be open to not 
only academics, but also to those from research institutes or industry. In case of an  
external candidate, depending on suitability, he / she may be offered a regular 
faculty position or a visiting appointment of a fixed duration.    
 
The position will be widely publicized through newspaper advertisement and online 
platforms and application s invited from external and internal candidates.   
 
In case of external candidates, short listed candidates will be evaluated by the 
faculty -at-large in the Institute through the usual process of Skype meeting, visit to 
the Institute, research seminar and a teaching session , etc. The Standing Committee 
on faculty affairs will consider credentials of the candidates, f eedback from faculty 
(and students) along with refer ence letters to make its recommendations .  
 
A Selection Committee will  consider the externa l and internal candidates  as well as 
recommendations of the Standing Committee on faculty affairs . It may choose to 
interview some of the  candidates  at its discretion. The Committee will consist of the 
Director as the Chair, Dean (Research and Development) , Professor -in-Charge 
(Faculty Affairs) and 2 to 4  additional members drawn from a) all past and present 
Directors of IITs/IISc/IISERs, b) current and former Council nominees on the IITGN 
Board of Governors, or c) all past and present Visitor’s Nominees fo r IITGN.  
 
Recommendation of the Selection Committee will be presented to the Chairman, 
Board of Governors for consideration and approval and then ratified by BOG in its 
next meeting.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 2 1 (version 2.0, September 2021) Page 2 of 2  
Once appointed, the incumbent is expected to teach, carry out research and provide 
service to the institute. The focus of research must be in the areas of water 
purification and sanitation to develop cost -effective and innovative solutions mainly 
pertainin g to the Indian scenario.  
 
Whenever an incumbent completes the Chair tenure, his/her performance be 
presented before the Selection Committee, which may recommend to (a) renew the 
Chair position for another term to the incumbent, or (b) advertise the posit ion to 
faculty members in the Institute, and the incumbent will have an option to be 
considered against the advertisement.  
 
Operating Norms:  
a) The Chair position will be offered for five years initially and be renewed for 
another five years after review by the Selection Committee. It can be renewed 
any number of times by the same process at the end of each term. The 
incumbent will continue to hold the Chair if there is a delay in holding the 
Selection Committee process.   
b) In case of an external candidate bein g offered a position on contract of less than 
five-years, the Chair will be for duration of the contract.  
c) In case of external faculty candidate:  The incumbent will receive Rs. 50,000/ - per 
month as honorarium (in addition to the salary  from MHRD grants) . He/she may 
however request for part  (or even the full amount)  of the honorarium  to go to 
his/her Professional Development Account ( PDA). 
d) In case of internal faculty candidate : The incumbent will receive Rs . 25,000 /- per 
month as honorarium and Rs . 25,000 /- per month as contribution to the 
Professional Development Account (PDA). The incumbent may ask for a  part or 
even the full amount of the honorarium to go to his/her PDA.  
e) The amounts mentioned in c) and d ) may be revised upwards in due cou rse with 
approval  of the Board.  
f) Depending on funds availability and requirements, the Institute may provide 
additional grants to support research activity of the Cha ir.  
g) The incumbent is expected to mention the title of the  Chair in his/her designation , 
visiting cards, pub lications, etc.  
h) The Chair will submit an annual report to the Institute on his/her activities in a 
format prescribed by  the Institute . Failure to submit such a report in a timely 
manner may lead to discontinuation of the award of Chair.  
i) The Institute is ex pected to submit annual report to the Donors and IITGN 
Foundation (IITGNF) on the academic activities of the Chair and on the income, 
the expenses incurred and the period ending balance of the Endowment.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 04 (Version 3.0, September 2021) Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR 
 
PROCESS FOR HANDLING OF FACULTY APPLICATIONS 
 
The Institute has been recruiting many outstanding faculty candidates through the Standing 
Committee. This note outlines the flowchart for processing the applications for consideration 
through the Standing Committee (a) efficiently and systematically, (b) in a way that does not 
take too much time, and (c) which effectively engages the faculty members in the decision-
making process in terms of faculty recruitment at the Institute. Guidelines for evaluating Faculty 
Candidates can be found under Faculty Affairs Advisories (advisory #2 and #3) on the Institute 
Website.  
 
On Receiving an Application:  
 
Upon receipt of the application, Discipline Search Committee Member (DSCM) will share the 
application with all faculty members (within thirty days of the receipt of application) in the 
concerned discipline seeking feedback from them within a reasonable amount of time (typically 
within seven days). Based on the feedback thus obtained, DSCM will categorize the application 
in the A, B, or C category. If there are no or limited responses from the discipline colleagues, 
DSCM will categorize the application as per their discretion and will record the same fact. In all 
cases, the DSCM can obtain feedback from the Chairman of the Faculty Search Committee 
(CFSC), Search Committee Coordinator (SCC) of the concerned discipline, and Professor-in-
Charge (PIC-FA) to rate the application. 
 
Classification of Applications:  
● A (High Priority Candidates with excellent credentials to be considered by Standing 
Committee on priority) 
● B (Candidates where more thought and information is needed to make a better 
judgment on whether to pursue the candidature further), and 
● C (Candidates that need not be considered by the Standing Committee. May be 
considered at the Selection Committee time if required). 
Applications placed in category 'B' will be assessed to place them in either category ‘A’ or ‘C.’ 
This can either be done based on the colleagues' feedback or after Video conferencing with the 
candidate. 
 
The SCC and CFSC may review the classification of applications at any stage of the process. In 
case of disagreements on the classification, CFSC will decide the suitability of the application 
for further processing.  
 
The applications in various categories will be processed in the following way: 
 
Category ‘A’ Applications 
 
i. The DSCM will ensure that the application is complete in all respects.  
ii. The DSCM will schedule a video-interaction (erstwhile “Skype Session”) session with 
the candidate as soon as possible in consultation with the SCC, and Chairman, FSC.  
iii. The DSCM, PIC-FA and all faculty members of the concerned discipline(s) are 
expected to be present during the video interaction. The purpose of the video Faculty Affairs Advisory 04 (Version 3.0, September 2021) Page 2 
 interaction is to judge the candidate’s general attitude and communication skills as 
well as to assess his/her teaching interests and clarity on future research plans. 
iv. The DSCM sends requests for reference letters through the Institute Management 
System (IMS) portal if the feedback based on the video interaction is positive.    
v. If the reference letters and feedback based on the video interaction are positive, the 
DSCM and Chairman FSC will finalize the date of the visit of the candidate at the 
earliest. 
 
Category ‘B’ Applications 
 
i. The applications will be assessed with the intention of placing them in either category 
‘A’ or ‘C’. 
ii. The DSCM will ensure that the application is complete in all respects.   
iii. The DSCM collates feedback from faculty members of the concerned discipline(s), 
Chairman FSC, and PIC-FA. 
iv. If the overall feedback is positive for the applicant to be placed in category ‘A,’ DSCM 
will finalize the date of the video interaction after discussing with Chairman FSC and  
PIC-FA on priority.  
v. The DSCM sends requests for reference letters through the Institute Management 
System (IMS) portal if the feedback based on the video interaction is positive. 
vi. If the reference letters and feedback based on the video-interaction session are 
positive, the DSCM and Chairperson FSC to finalize the date of the visit of the 
candidate after checking the availability of the SCC, PIC-FA, and the Director. 
 
Category ‘C’ Applications 
 
These applications need not be pursued further at this time for consideration by the Standing 
Committee. These will be processed in the usual manner before the Selection Committee 
meeting. The SCC will review the closed cases (category ‘C’ applications). The CFSC and PIC-
FA may review the classification of applications at any stage of the process. In case of 
disagreements on the classification, CFSC will decide the suitability of the application for further 
processing.  
 
 
Scheduling Video-conferencing: 
 
Once DSCM identifies the pool of 4-5 candidates for video conferencing, they will send an email 
to PIC-FA (with a copy to CFSC and SCC) to schedule the video conferencing. In the case of 
exceptional candidates, scheduling of video conferencing can be expedited after consulting PIC-
FA. Video-conferencing of such candidates can be scheduled without identifying the pool.  
 
Post-video-conferencing: 
 
Comments on Video-conferencing forms should be detailed with a clear articulation of the 
reasoning behind the final decision. For example, due attention should be paid to the 
applications belonging to reserved categories and appropriate relaxations in age should be 
considered for the reserved category candidates. Similarly, the reason for closure should be 
commensurate with the comments made in various sections of the video-conferencing form. 
 
Recommendation letters 
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 04 (Version 3.0, September 2021) Page 3 
 Request for Recommendation letters will be sent by DSCM through IMS if (a) the members 
present in video conferencing are positive to process the application further and/or (b) more 
information is required on the candidate before arriving at the decision to process the 
application further.  
 
Visit of the Candidate  
 
i. The DSCM schedules the visit and arranges meetings with all concerned subject to 
their availability.   
ii. Meetings to include Professor-in-Charge (FA), Chairperson FSC, Search Committee 
Coordinator of the concerned discipline, and practically all the faculty from the 
concerned discipline(s); and some faculty from other disciplines.  The candidate 
would meet the Director only if he/she is promising; need not include the Director's 
name in the meeting schedule. 
iii. The DSCM will also organize a visit to the labs and various facilities.  
iv. The DSCM will assist the Faculty Recruitment Office in completing pre-arrival 
procedures. 
v. The Hour-to-hour  schedule of the visit will be e-mailed to the candidate before 
his/her arrival.  
vi. The DSCM announces the faculty candidate’s visit (including details of the teaching 
session and the research seminar) by e-mail to concerned students and faculty 
members. 
vii. The DSCM may use the help of a teaching assistant (TA) to coordinate the one-to-
one meetings, the teaching session, and the research seminar. 
viii. The DSCM will coordinate with the Faculty Recruitment Office to complete travel 
reimbursement procedures.  
ix. The DSCM will coordinate with faculty and students who attended the teaching 
session and research seminar and/or had a one-to-one meeting with the candidate to 
obtain the feedback for each session.  
x. Chairman FSC to brief the Director about the suitability of the candidate at whatever 
stage of the day they consider appropriate and if the candidate is found suitable 
arrange a meeting with the Director. 
 
Assessment of Candidates Who Cannot Visit IITGN 
 
i. As far as possible, the candidates must be encouraged to visit the Institute. In some 
outstanding cases and in exceptional circumstances, Video-conference based 
interviews and seminars may be organized (Virtual Visit).  However, even in such a 
case, the possibility should be explored if the candidate can be interviewed in person 
by a representative of the Institute. 
ii. For candidates presenting via video conference, in addition to the Research, 
Research Proposal, and Teaching Seminars, one-on-one interactions of the Faculty 
candidate with discipline faculty members, SCC, PIC-FA, and Chairperson, FSC will 
be organized. 
iii. The DSCM will coordinate with faculty and students who attended the teaching 
session and research seminar and/or had a one-to-one meeting with the candidate to 
obtain the feedback for each session.  
iv. As with the in-person visit, a meeting to discuss the feedback on the candidate’s visit 
should be held with the participation of Chairperson FSC, Professor-in-Charge (FA), 
SCC, and discipline members. Faculty Affairs Advisory 04 (Version 3.0, September 2021) Page 4 
 v. If the feedback from the video-conference-based presentation and one-on-one 
meetings is found positive, the Chairperson FSC will brief the Director about the 
suitability of the candidate and arrange a meeting of the Director with the candidate 
via video conference.   
 
RFP (Recommended for Further Processing) applications on the recommendation of the 
Screening Committee: 
 
DSCMs will ask RFP candidates to make a research presentation not exceeding 20 minutes 
during the first video-conferencing session. If the feedback of attendees present during the 
research presentation is positive, they can be considered for a visit. 
 
Notes: 
i. The application must be shared with another discipline in case of overlapping 
research interests, academic expertise as per the discretion of the concerned DSCM 
or Chairman FSC. Chairman FSC and the Professor-in-charge (FA) should be kept 
informed if such a case arises.  
ii. Members of the secondary discipline opted by the Faculty Candidate in their 
application should necessarily be invited by the DSCM to the video-conferencing and 
seminars during the visit. 
iii. Professor-in-Charge (FA) with assistance from Chairman FSC and DSCM to review 
and complete documentation of faculty applications in each discipline periodically 
(say, every two months). This will include verifying the entered information about the 
candidates and also documenting specific reasons for not pursuing applications 
further through the Standing Committee. Academic Affairs Advisory 49 (Version 2.0, February 202 4)                                   Page 1 of 2 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
DIRECTOR’S PHD FELLOWSHIP AT IIT GANDHINAGAR  
(As approved by the BoG in its 32nd meeting held on 20 August 2021  and  
39th meeting held on 19 January 2024 ) 
 
1. Background : “Director’s PhD Fellowship” at the Indian Institute of Technology 
(IIT) Gandhinagar is intended to encourage top -quality IIT Gandhinagar students 
to join the PhD programme of the Institute right after completing their degree 
(BTech/MSc/MA/MTech) at the Institute. Having excelled in their academics at IIT 
Gandhinagar, such students could transition to their PhD programme with ease 
and complete the PhD work faster than the other students.  
 
2. Eligibility  
● BTech/MSc/MA/MTech students of IIT Gandhinagar in the final year of their 
UG/PG programmes are eligible to apply.   
● Applicants must have secured a specified minimum CPI. The minimum CPI 
will be 8.0 for applicants from the BTech programmes, 8.5 for MSc/MA 
programmes and 9.0 for MTech programmes.   
● Since, the selection to this fellowship happens before graduation, the offer to 
this fellowship will be conditional to the student securing the above minimum 
specified CPI at the time of graduation.  
● The CPI before any Pass/Fail grade conversion will be considered.   
 
3. Selection process:  
● There will be a call for applications during Semester 1 (July to November) of 
every year.   
● A discipline level screening committee will shortlist eligible applicants for the 
fellowship. The Chairman, Senate will form an Institute level selection 
committee which will interview shortlisted candidates and make appropriate 
recommendations for consideration of the Chairman, Senate through Dean 
(Academic Affairs).   
● If an eligible student wishes to apply for the fellowship after the regular call for 
applications, he/she may send a request to the Dean (Academic Affairs) for 
consideration. Such requests may be considered on a case by case basis. 
However, all such requests must be made before graduation from the eligible 
programmes.  
 
4. Scholarship: Students joining the PhD programme under this fellowship are 
expected to complete his/her PhD within four years of joining the programme. 
The selected students shall be provided fellowship for four years during their PhD 
programme as given below:  
 
● Rs. 55,000/ - (Rs. 37,000/ - usual fellowship + Rs. 18,000/ - additional 
fellowship) per month for the first two years of their Ph.D programme.  
●  Rs. 60,000/ - (Rs. 42,000/ - usual fellowship + Rs. 18,000/ - additional 
fellowship) per month for the next two years of their Ph.D programme.  Academic Affairs Advisory 49 (Version 2.0, February 202 4)                                   Page 2 of 2 
 In case a student cannot complete his/her Ph.D programme within four years of 
joining the programme, the student may be given a regular Ph.D fellowship (Rs. 
42,000/ - per month at present) for the fifth year.   
 
5. Expectations:  
• The student must maintain a CPI of 8.5 or more at every stage of the PhD 
programme to retain the additional fellowship. The Institute will also 
discontinue the additional fellowship if a student accumulates three or more 
unsatisfactory (U) grades for PhD thesis units.  
• A rigorous midterm review of the progress of the student will be carried out by 
an Institute level committee setup by the Dean (Academic Affairs) after 
completion of two years in the PhD programme. The additional fellowship will 
be discontinued in case the student’s progress is not found satisfactory by the 
review committee.  
• The student will be required to clear the qualifying examination and get 
themselves certified in Scientific Writing within one year of joining the PhD 
programme. The additional fellowship may be stopped permanently in case 
the student fails to complete these requirements within the specified period.  
 
6. Service: Students availing of the Director’s fellowship are required to spend 12 
hours per week for Institute activities, including support to teaching activities of 
the Institute.   
 
7. Tuition fee, curriculum structure and other regulations:  
● The student may join the PhD programme during the summer term 
immediately after completing all the credit requirements for their previous 
degree.  
● The student will be assigned a supervisor at the beginning of the programme, 
and a Doctoral Studies Committee (DSC) is to be formed within one month of 
joining the PhD programme.  
● The Institute expects the student to start research work related to his/her 
thesis right from the beginning of the programme. The students are expected 
to register for thesis units in the first semester of their PhD programme itself.  
● The Institute will encourage the selected students to apply for prestigious 
external fellowships like the PMRF.  
● The fees structure and other regulations will be the same as that of the 
regular PhD programme at IIT Gandhinagar.  
 Request for Minor Work  
(Institute  Works Department)  
Details of the requester:                                                                                                                Date: 
Name of the requester   
Contact number   
E-mail   
Office room number   
 
Details of requirements  
No. Details of the request  
1 Exact requirements (with dimension if any)  
  
 
 
 
2 Lab Location / Proposed location  
  
 
 
3 Details of the Civil work requirement (with all dimensions/design)  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 Electrical work requirement (Please fill details in Annexure -1 enclosed)  
  
 
 
5 Attach the s chematic of the requirement in details (with dimension s) 
 
 
Signature of requester        Name and Signature of Head of  
Department  (HoD) /Section In -charge  
 
Comments of IWD Engineers with name, signature and date:                            
 Annexure -1 
Sr. No. Equipment  Name  Input power 
consumption 
(kW/k VA/Amp)  1 Phase or 
3 Phase  Power point 
requirement 6 A /16 A/ 
MCB connection  Remark s, if any 
1      
2      
3      
4      
5      
6      
7      
8      
        
Note:  In case an y equipment mentioned above ha s its own UPS set then kindly provide following details.  
Sr. No. Equipment Name  kVA Ratting of 
Associated UPS  UPS Input is of 
1 Phase or 3 
Phase  ? UPS Output is 
of 1 Phase or 3 
Phase ? Remark s, if any 
1      
2      
3      
4      
 General Administration Advisory 04 (Version 2.0, January 201 9) Page 1 of 6 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR TA/DA RATES TO FACULTY/STAFF MEMBERS DURING 
FOREIGN TRAVEL  
(As approved by the BoG in its 3rd meeting held on 07 January 2011 and  
modified in 25th meeting held on 03 December 2018)  
 
 
The Board of Gover nors, IIT Gandhinagar in its 25th meeting held on 03 December 
2018 modified the norms as given below  with immediate effect . 
 
(a) DA rates may be claimed as per Government of India rules prevailing from time 
to time. The currently applicable rules, issued by Mi nistry of Finance (Department 
of Expenditure) vide letter No.Q/FD/695/3/2000 dated 21 September 2010, are as 
given in Annexure -1. 
 
(b) Alternatively, the employee may choose to claim DA at the following rates 
(including accommodation charges) without any v ouchers in place of (a) above.  
 
(i)  US/ Canada/ Europe/ Japan/ New Zealand/ Australia/ South Korea:                  
US $150 per day . 
(ii)  Countries other than mentioned in (i) above : US $100 per day  
(iii)  If full hospitality has been provided in kind (boarding and l odging), only per 
diem is payable at 25% of the rates mentioned at (i) and (ii).  
 
 
 
 General Administration Advisory 04 (Version 2.0, January 201 9) Page 2 of 6 
  
Annexure -1 
 General Administration Advisory 04 (Version 2.0, January 201 9) Page 3 of 6 
 
 General Administration Advisory 04 (Version 2.0, January 201 9) Page 4 of 6 
 
 General Administration Advisory 04 (Version 2.0, January 201 9) Page 5 of 6 
 
 General Administration Advisory 04 (Version 2.0, January 201 9) Page 6 of 6 
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 02 (C) (March 2020)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
STUDENT AFFAIRS  
 
TUITION FEE WAIVER/ FINANCIAL AID  AT IITGN  
 
 
Tuition Fee Waiver for Undergraduate Students with effect from 2020 -21  
 
  The ‘Tuition Fee Waiver’  scheme for the undergraduate student s admitted in a cademic year 
2016 -17 or afterwards is  as follows . 
 
 The SC/ST/PH students shall receive  complete tuition fee waiver . 
 The most economically backward students , whose family income is less than Rs. 1.0 
lakh per annum,  shall receive  full remission of the tuitio n fee.   
 The other economically backward students, whose family income is between Rs. 1.0 
lakh to Rs. 2.5 lakhs per annum, shall also receive full remission of the tuition fee. 
1/3rd of this tuition fee waiver is supported thorough Student Benevolent & Wel fare 
Fund or from the Excellence Funds in the Endowment  of the Institute . 
 The other economically backward students , whose family income is between              
Rs. 2.5 lakh to Rs. 5.0 lakhs per annum,  shall receive  remission of 2/3rd of the tuition 
fee. 
 Students whose annual family income is less than ₹ 9,00,000/ - shall have access to 
interest free loan under the Vidyalaxmi scheme for the total portion of the tuition fee 
payable.  
 
Tuition Fee Waiver for Master Students  (M.Tech, M.SC and MA)  with effect from  
Academic Year 2020 -21 
 
The ‘Tuition Fee Waiver’ scheme  for the master students  joining with effect from academic 
year 20 20-21 is as follows . 
 
 The SC/ST/PH students shall receive  complete tuition fee waiver . 
 Students with annual parental  income upto Rs. 2. 5 lakhs  shall also receive full 
remission of the tuition fee from Student Benevolent & Welfare Fund or from 
the Excellence Funds in the Endowment  of the Institute . 
 
TATA Motors Limited Financial Aid Program (TMLFAP)  
 
The TM LFAP was introduced at IITGN in t he year 2016 and is open to all the undergraduate 
students of IIT Gandhinagar. The main objective is to provide financial assistance to students 
from economically weaker background. The beneficiary students are expected to donate  the 
money back to IIT Gand hinagar once they are financially independent, which will be used to 
support other students. Students who obtain a minimum CPI of 6.0 (Except 1st Year) and 
whose annual family income is not more than ₹ 6,50,000/ - in non -metro cities and ₹ 
7,50,000/ - in metro cities will be eligible to apply for this program.  
 
Application and Process of Selection:  
 
Applications will be invited from the UG/PG  students  for the ‘Tuition Fee Waiver /Financial 
Aid’ once every  Academic Year . The ‘ Tuition Fee Waiver /Financial Aid’ is approved by the 
Director on recommendation of Senate Scholarships and Prizes Committee (SSPC). The 
renewal of tuition fee waiver /financial aid shall be based on the submission of required 
documents to Student Affairs Office.  Academic Affairs Advisory 30 (Version 5.1, December 202 2)                                 Page 1 of 2 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
ADVISORY ON FEE AND OTHER ALLIED CHARGES  
(As approved by the BoG in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021)  
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021 approved 
the following fee structure for students at IIT Gandhinagar.  This revised fee structure will come 
into effect from Semester -I of Academic Year 2022 -23 as per details provided below .  
 
  BTech~/BSc 
(Engineering)  Regular* 
PhD / 
MTech# / 
MSc# / MA# 
students  Other$ PhD / 
MTech / MSc / 
MA students, 
and PGDIIT 
students  Visiting  
Students  
(Full time)  Visiting 
Students  
(Part 
time)  
A. Fees Payable One Time, at Admission  
Admission Fee  3,000  
0 0 Contribution towards Academic 
Documentation  2,500  
Alumni Fraternity Fund  1,000  
Medical Examination  1,250  
Total A  7,750      
  
B. Refundable Deposit  
Institute Security Deposit  5,000  10,000  10,000  
Total B  5,000  10,000  10,000  
  
C. Semester Fee  
Tuition Fee  100,000  10,000  50,000  1,00,000 
(BTech); 
50,000 
(PhD/MTech/ 
MSc/MA)  5,000 per 
credit  
Academic Facilities and Services  2,500    
Hostel Seat Rent^ 6,000    
Hostel Utilities and Amenities^ 8,250    
Mess & Other Supplementary Charges^ 3,000    
Student Activities  3,000    
Medical Group Insurance  838   
Student Benevolent Fund  1,000    
Student Medical Fund  1,000    
Total C  125,5 88 35,588 75,588     
  
D. Mess and Laundry  Rs. 21,000    same as other 
full-time 
students    
E. Continuation Fee for sponsored 
PhD students after completion of 
residential requirements      25,000 per 
semester      
            
~ For 2014 and 2015 batch BTech students, the tuition fee will continue to be Rs. 45,000 per semester.  
* "Regular" students are those who are admitted through the Institute's own admission mechanisms and supported 
by the Institute through government grants, or R&D or endowment funds. This includes students in the Start Early 
PhD, Early Admit MTech, Early Ad mit MSc, Work and Study MTech programs, but not students admitted directly 
into the PGDIIT program.  
# Revised tuition fees of Rs. 10,000 for regular MTech, MSc, MA students will only be applicable to students 
joining in July 2022 and later. Existing stud ents will continue paying current tuition fee of Rs. 5,000 per semester.  
$ "Other" students are those who are supported/sponsored by external organizations (e.g., PRL students, 
employees of organizations such as ISRO -SAC, officers of the Indian Armed Forc es, etc.), as well as students 
admitted by IITGN directly into the PGDIIT program. The revised tuition fees of Rs. 50,000 and the revised 
continuation fee for sponsored PhD students will be applicable to all students in this category (including existing 
students) from July 2022 onwards.  Academic Affairs Advisory 30 (Version 5.1, December 202 2)                                 Page 2 of 2 
 ^ These items are applicable in lumpsum (no pro -rata discounts), but only when a student stays in the hostels. The 
charges cover a period from 5 days before registration to 5 days after the last date of exams, and include t he mid -
semester break. For new students however, the period will begin from 2 days before the start date of their 
orientation program (Foundation Program me, Aarohan, etc.) or the date of registration (whichever is earlier) and 
go until 5 days after the las t date of exams.  
Students of BTech -MTech Dual Degree and BTech -MSc Dual Degree are required to pay the fee applicable for 
BTech Students till 8th Semester of their study, and thereafter, pay the fee applicable for the MTech/MSc 
programme till the completion of the requirem ents of their degree.  
Fee for visiting  students will be as mentioned above unless there is a formal agreement between IITGN and the 
Institute/ University for student exchange programme. In such cases, the terms of the agreement will prevail.  
Regular Ph D and MTech students who convert to PGDIIT will continue paying the tuition fee for the regular 
programs even after conversion.  
 
SUMMER TERM  
  BTech~ / BSc 
(Engineering)  Regular* PhD / 
MTech / MSc / MA 
students  Other$ PhD / MTech / 
MSc / MA students, and  
PGDIIT students  Visiting  
Students ( Full 
time)  Visiting  
Students 
(Part time)  
Tuition  5,000 per 
credit  flat 5,000  flat 25,000  NA NA 
Hostel  8,500  8,500  8,500    Hostel rent for summer term covers the entire period between Sem II and Sem I.  
 
WINTER BREAK  
  BTech~ / BSc 
(Engineering)  Regular* PhD / 
MTech / MSc / MA 
students  Other$ PhD / MTech / 
MSc / MA students, and 
PGDIIT students  Visiting  
Students 
(Full time)  Visiting  
Students ( Part 
time)  
Tuition  5,000 per 
credit  flat 5,000  flat 25,000  NA NA 
Hostel  No charge for "continuing" students (those who were registered in Sem I and will register for Sem 
II). 
For students not registering for Sem II (e.g., students who may be graduating early), the per day 
rate will apply starting from the 6th day after the last date of exams.  
For students not registered in Sem I (e.g., PhD students joining in Sem II who arrive early), the per 
day rate will apply until 5 days before registration.  
Note 1: SC, ST and PwD (with 40% minimum disability) students in regular programme will be eligible for waiver 
of tuition fee (including summer term  and winter break ). 
  
Note 2 : The most economically backward BTech students of 2016 batch onwards (whose family income is less 
than Rs. 1 lakh per annum) shall get full remission of the Tuition Fee (including summer term).  
   
Note 3:  The other economically backward BTech students of 20 16 batch onwards (whose family income is 
between Rs. 1 lakh to Rs. 5 lakh per annum) shall get remission of 2/3rd of the Tuition Fee (including summer 
term).  
 
FEES FOR TRANSCRIPTS/DUPLICATE GRADE CARDS & DEGREE CERTIFICATE  
  
Graduating 
Students / 
Alumni  Two transcripts free upon completion of graduation requirements  
Rs. 1,000 for each additional transcript and duplicate grade report  
$50 per set of transcripts if applying from abroad  
Postage: Rs. 500 for posting in India and Rs. 2,500 for posting abroad through India Post.  
Courier: Rs. 1,000 for courier in India and Rs. 4,000 for courier abroad, if the student/alumnus opts 
for courier services instead of Post.  
Rs. 5000 for duplicate degree certificate.  
  
Students on 
Roll One free transcript at the end of each semester for BTech students from 3rd year onwards and PG 
students from 2nd year onwards  
Rs. 500 for each additional transcript and duplicate grade report  
Postage: Rs. 500 for posting in India and Rs. 2,500 for posting abroad through India Post.  
Courier: Rs. 1,000 for courier in India and Rs. 4,000 for  courier abroad, if the student  opts for 
courier services instead of Post.  
 Student  Affairs Advisory 17 (Version 1.0, May 2022)                                                Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
RESIDENCY FELLOWSHIPS FOR ARTISTS, ATHLETES, AND  
SPORTS PERSONS AT IIT GANDHINAGAR  
(As approved by the BoG in its 34th meeting held on 28 April 2022) 
 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 34th meeting held on 28 April 2022 
approved residency fellowships for artists, athletes, and sports persons at IIT 
Gandhinagar. The Residency Fellowship at IITGN is envisioned to bring such young 
individuals who are artists, athletes, and sports persons who ca n work with students 
to create a better well -being ambiance on campus.  
 
Residency Fellowship at the Institute will be open to young individuals who are 
passionately involved in their domain to engage in the creation, collaboration, and 
dialogue with the I ITGN Community. They will also promote opportunities for 
community engagement on campus to encourage the community members to 
participate actively in various projects.  
 
The fellows will be selected through a competitive process and receive a stipend of                  
Rs. 35,000 per month. The fellowship will be awarded initially for six months and 
may be extended up to two years in case of outstanding performance.  
 
The fellows are expected to dedicate themselves full -time. They are also expected to 
prom ptly document and disseminate their work's details. They may also be involved 
in conducting workshops, courses, or other activities that benefit the community.  
 
 Research and Development Advisory 09 (Version 1.0, February 201 5) Page 1 of 2  
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
INCUBATION POLICY OF THE INSTITUTE  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 15th meeting held on 02 December 201 4) 
 
The Board in its 7th meeting held on 27  June 2012 approved that the procedures and policies  
of SIDBI Innovation and Incubation Centre (SIIC) at IIT Kanpur be followed by the IITGN 
Incubation Centre (IIC) till such time that IITGN comes up with its own document of policy 
and procedures. Further , the Board in its 15th meeting held on 02 December 2 014 has 
decided for the creation of non -profit Section 8 company “IIT Gandhinagar Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship Centre” (IIEC). As and when this separate legal entity IIEC comes into 
existence, it will be free to formulate its own procedures and policies . Till such time, the 
Institute will follow the following Incubation Policy, as approved by the Board in its 15th meeting 
held on 02 December 2014 (herein „incubator‟ refers to IIC or IIEC, as the case may be):  
 
1. Adoption of an explicit goal of incubation t o be “nurturing high growth technology 
startups that generate commercial and social impact” . 
2. Inclusion of programmes to support entrepreneurs to build business plans and 
minimum viable products (MVPs) and support the scale -up of lab -stage 
technologies to p roduct validation stage as part of the overall incubation 
framework. These activities will enable the incubator to support potentially higher 
risk/higher value companies and social enterprises and create a high quality deal 
source for the incubator.  Based on the extent of support received by the founders 
through these programs, i ncubator may receive equity of upto 4% of the company 
incorporated by them.  
3. Financial support to incubatees may include both debt and equity.  
a. Equity financing for each incubates ma y not exceed Rs 25 lakhs.  
b. Debt financing will have interest rate of 1 -5% per annum depending on the risk 
profile of the company. To encourage entrepreneurship, upto initial Rs. 5 lakhs 
of debt to an incubatee will be given without guarantees. Any debt abo ve that 
provided to incubatees will be based on a lien on the assets of the company. 
Debt financing for each incubatee including any deferred payments will not 
exceed Rs 25 lakhs.  
4. In case the incubatee is a registered company, incubator  may receive  4% of 
equity of the company for incubation and mentoring services provided  
subsequent to incorporation.  For avoidance of doubt, this equity does not include 
the equity mentioned in Point 2 above.  
5. Total equity taken by incubator in exchange for incubation, financi ng, technology 
inputs and services provided may not exceed 15%.  
6. All equity received by incubator will be on a non -diluted basis until company 
receives cumulative third party equity financing of Rs 2 crores. Thereafter, 
incubators percentage of issued share s will be diluted equally along all other 
investors.  
7. Adoption of admission, evaluation, funding and exit criteria will be modified from 
time to time to accommodate the objectives and programmes identified above.  Research and Development Advisory 09 (Version 1.0, February 201 5) Page 2 of 2  
 8. To encourage a collaborative atmosphere amon g incubate es, they will not hire 
employees of each other without permission from current employee or incubator.  
9. Explicit adherence of incubatees to the ethical values and principles governing 
the Institute will be required.  
10. Clear explicit guidelines will be evolved and implemented to manage conflict -of-
interest and IP related issues.  
11. The Institute may also provide one year pre -incubation support to its alumni, 
faculty and others on a case to case basis.  
 
 Academic Affairs Advisory 44 (Version 1.0, January 201 9)  Page 1 of 1 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
FEES FOR  STUDENTS OF FOREIGN NATIONALITY  
(As approved by the BoG in its 25th meeting held on 03 December 2018) 
 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 25th meeting held on 03 December 2018 
approved the following new fee structure for students of foreign nationality  with 
immediate effect . 
 
1. Tuition Fees:  
One time fees payable at the 
time of admission  US$ 500  
Tuition fees per semester (two 
semesters per year)  US$ 1000 for students from SAARC countries 
(Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, 
Bhutan, Sri Lanka, Maldives)  
 
US$ 2000 for other students  
All other fees (Hostel, Mess, 
Laundry, etc.)  As applicable to Indian students  
 
The Board also authorised  the Director for giving suitable tuition fee waivers (full 
or partial) to deserving candidates on a case -to-case basis on the 
recommendation of the Dean, Academic Affairs.  
 
2. Scholarships:  
The Board approved that suitable scholarships, equivalent to thos e given to Indian 
students, may be approved by the Director to deserving foreign nationals on a 
case -to-case basis upon recommendation of the Dean, Academic Affairs. 
However, if a scholarship is given, the student will be required to do TA duties 
similar t o those of Indian students.   
General Administration Advisory  08 (Version 3.0, January  2014)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR SOFT ADVANCE TO NEW STAFF MEMBERS  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 9th meeting held on 28th March 2013)  
In the existing context as per Govt. of India norms, a regular employee of the instit ute may 
avail of a number of loans from the institute: for house building, conveyance and the like. 
Usually, such loans have a long repayment period and the interest is not compounded, 
turning these into rather soft loans. Many of our staff are not eligibl e for these loans as 
they do not fulfill the required eligibility criteria. For example, house building loan can be 
granted to a permanent employee only (and not on probation),  whereas Motor Car 
Advance can be availed by an employee who is drawing pay in the pay band (i.e. band 
pay) of Rs. 19,530/ - pm or more. These restrictions make m any of new staff members 
ineligible for these loans. In a few cases many mid -level officers coming from outside are 
in need for financial assistance to establish and settle a t the new place of posting.  
 
It is, therefore, proposed that an interest -free soft advance of Rs. 1.00 Lakh may be made 
available to the new staff members joining institute in PB -I & PB -II and Rs. 2.00 Lakhs in 
PB-III and PB -IV. The amount will be recovere d from salary over a maximum period of 20 
months, or for the remaining period of deputation/lien/probation, whichever happens to be 
first. This advance is meant to help the new staff members to comfortably incur initial 
establishment expenditures in settin g up the house and in purchase of conveyance. A 
similar scheme  is in vogue at the Institute for faculty members.  
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 0 9 (March 2020 ) Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
STUDENT AFFAIRS  
 
NORMS/ ADVISORY NOTE ON COMPREHENSIVE VIVA VOCE  
 
Preamble  
 
It was decided in the 3rd meeting of the Senate held on July 19, 2010 to include in the 
undergraduate curricular requirements a mandatory  (non-credit ) Pass/No Pass component in the 
form of viva voce /interview. The Senate noted that the viva voce  would help assess the 
effectiveness of the overall teaching –learning ambience and initiatives of the institute. Further, it 
would prove to be effec tive in identifying students needing additional attention, and thus will be 
beneficial to the students as well as the administration.  
 
The viva voce  is an endeavor to connect with our students personally, because at IITGN students 
are not roll numbers. Eve ry student is an independent individual and we value his/her likes, 
dislikes, views, and concerns. The viva voce  helps in knowing what individual student concerns 
are and in what ways we can be of help. Additionally, it is also a means of understanding the  
collective concerns of the IITGN student body, and how these may be addressed. We would like 
students and faculty to think of these sessions not as Q&As, but as conversations, an occasion for 
students to know the faculty and the faculty to know the studen ts beyond the parameters of the 
classrooms.  
 
In the previous 3 rounds of the viva voce , we received extremely good feedback, which helped 
the Institute to reach out to students who needed help, and also to understand the student body as 
a whole. We hope bo th students and faculty will continue to enjoy the conversations and we will 
successfully connect with each other.  
 
The process of viva voce  
 
Viva voce sessions are conducted once every semester, and students receive a Pass/No Pass  
grade for viva voce . The  viva voce  entails an approximately 15 minute session with each 
undergraduate student. The sessions are conducted by a panel comprising 2 faculty members, 
and the institute counselor or a designated personal of the institute. One of the faculty members 
is from the engineering discipline that the student is specializing in. He/she mainly focuses on 
the academic interests and standing, and the career goals of the student. The other faculty 
member is from outside that discipline. His/her focus is the co -curric ular and the extra -curricular 
activities of the student. The institute counselor discusses with the student his/her overall well 
being. At the end of each session, each member of the panel completes a form documenting 
his/her observations about the student . 
 
Once the viva voce  sessions are over for a semester, the institute counselor, under the guidance 
of Head, Counseling, prepares three reports summarizing the findings of the viva voce . One of 
the reports is shared with the student body, the other with th e faculty, and the  report of actionable 
items is shared with the concerned people. The needs of individual students as well as student 
groups determined through the viva voce  are addressed by the concerned.    
Dos and Don’ts for panel members  
 
1. Being on time  to conduct the sessions is essential. In case of an emergency, counseling 
service must be informed and helped to indentify someone else.  
 Student Affairs Advisory 0 9 (March 2020 ) Page 2 
 2. Information obtained in the viva voce is  strictly confidential. Thus being biased towards 
students based on informati on shared in the viva demoralizes students and defeats the 
very purpose of the viva voce . 
 
3. It is best not to come across as authoritative to the students in the viva. Being 
authoritative acts as a hindrance to students opening up. Further, conveying someth ing to 
students politely and empathetically proves to be far more effective than direct 
expressions of disapproval.  
 
4. It is suggested not to spend more than 15 minutes on one student. If the need of talking 
more with a particular student is felt, he/she can  be encouraged to meet the faculty 
member/s later for longer conversations. Long conversations during a scheduled session 
disrupt the entire viva voce  schedule. Faculty and student availability later becomes a 
major constraint in completing the process.  
 
5. In case it is not possible to talk with all the students scheduled during a particular slot, the 
panel needs to be available at another mutually convenient time.  
 
6. Viva voce works the best if the sessions are looked upon as conversations with  students 
and no t as question - answer sessions. We need to be respectful of students as individuals, 
regardless of their academic and other performance.  
 
Ours is a residential campus and often we are the only adults with whom our students have the 
opportunity to develop a  bond beyond the realms of their homes. Our small gestures that make 
them feel that we value them as persons and do not consider them to be just roll numbers or CPIs 
often go a long way to help in this direction. Strong faculty student relationship often s erves as a 
safety valve to prevent young students from opting for what is never the best option.  
 
Enclosures:  
1. Viva Voce form for Academics and Career  
2. Viva Voce form for Extra and co -curricular activities  
3. Viva Voce form for Emotional wellbeing  
4. Viva Voce for m for Session Review  
5. Basic Information form of Foundation Program 2012  
6. 4th year Viva Voce: Emotional Wellbeing  
7. 4th year Viva Voce: Academics    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 0 9 (March 2020 ) Page 3 
 
Enclosure 1    
 
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar  
 
 
 
Viva Voce: Academics & Career   
Semester:    
 
Name of the student  Batch  Branch      SemesterSPI&CPIOn GPS  
 
Y/N   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Is s/he satisfied with the current work load?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Any remarkable variation/s in academic   
performance and interests?  
 
 
 
 
Is s/he being able to p rioritize tasks correctly?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Any suggestions for betterment of teaching   
methods?    
 
 
 
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 0 9 (March 2020 ) Page 4 
  
Does s/he require help in any area?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What are the future career plans?    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________  
Name of the faculty member   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________ 
Signature of the faculty member  
 
 
Date:    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 0 9 (March 2020 ) Page 5 
 
Enclosure 2   
 
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar  
 
 
 
 
Viva Voce: Extra & co -curricular activities  
Semester:  
 
Name of the studen t Batch  Branch  Semester  
    
      
 
 
What kind of activities is s/he involved in?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Is there any flair or skill s/he wants to work on?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
His/her teamwork &leadership qualities:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How would you rate his/her knowledge of current   
affairs ? Does s/he keep up with the news?    
 
 
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 0 9 (March 2020 ) Page 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What kind of reading habits does s/he have?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What is his/her impression of Institute and   
facilities?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________  
Name of the faculty member   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________ _______ _________  
Signature of the faculty member  
 
 
Date:    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 0 9 (March 2020 ) Page 7 
 
Enclosure 3    
 
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar  
 
 
 
 
 
Viva Voce: Emotional wellbeing  
 
Semester:    
 
 
Name of the student  Batch  Branch  Semester  
    
      
 
 
 
 
Emotional support:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social circle:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Self-confidence  & Contentment with   
oneself:  
 
 
 
 
3 important values of his/her life?    
 
 
 
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 0 9 (March 2020 ) Page 8 
 
 
Source of motivation:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Any addiction?  
 
 
 
 
Change compared to last viva:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Does s/he require attention/h elp  
anywhere? :  
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________   
 
 
 
 
 
            ________________________  
 
Name of the institute counselor   
Signature of the institute counselor  
 
 
 
Date:    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 0 9 (March 2020 ) Page 9 
 
Enclosure 4    
 
 
Indian Institute of Technology G andhinagar  
 
 
 
 
 
Viva Voce Session Review:  
 
Date:  Time:  
 
Batch: I/II/III/IV  Branch: Chemical/Mechanical/Electrical  
 
1) How many students were expected to appear  for the session?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2) How many students appeared for the session?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3) List of students that wer e absent:  
 
 
 
 
4) About the session: did it start on time; were all the members present; & any such 
relevant information:  
 
 
5) Any interesting observation by the panel:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________  ____________________  _________________  
(Signature: Faculty)  (Signature : Faculty)  (Signature: Counselor)  
  
  
  Student Affairs Advisory 0 9 (March 2020 ) Page 10 
 
 
Enclosure 5    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 0 9 (March 2020 ) Page 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 0 9 (March 2020 ) Page 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 0 9 (March 2020 ) Page 13 
 
Enclosure 6    
 
 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar  
 
 
 
4th year Viva Voce: Emotional Wellbeing  
 
Name of the student  Batch  Branch  
   
     
 
How has your emotional journey been at IITGN?    
 
 
What are few factors which can affect a student’ s’ emotional well being at IITGN? 
(for example: performance anxiety)    
 
 
 
 
 
What do you think can help students during their low emotional phases at IITGN?    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What are the coping strategies (constructive and destructive) students generally adopt t o 
vent out?    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Any suggestions to create an emotionally healthier environment.    Student Affairs Advisory 0 9 (March 2020 ) Page 14 
 
Enclosure 7  
 
4th year Viva Voce: Academics   
 
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar  
 
 
 
Name of the student  Batch  Branch  
   
    
 
Describe your academic journey at IITGN.    
 
 
 
 
 
Share your feedback for teaching methods and suggestions about teaching methods at   
IITGN.    
 
 
 
 
 
Your suggestion for courses offered at IITGN    
 
 
 
 
 
How much has your academic performance effected your overall well being at IITGN    
 
 
 
 
 
What factors encouraged or discouraged you about studies at IITGN  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Feedback about faculty / staff    Faculty Affairs Advisory 0 6(Version 1.0, July 2012)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
SUMMER RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP FOR FACULTY  
 
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 4th meeting held on 3rd September 2011 ) 
 
A. Objectives:  
 
1. To encourage faculty to s pend considerable parts of summer in the campus engaged in 
intense research . 
2. To encourage faculty to a ctively seek external funding for their research . 
3. To encourage and reward (financially) the faculty (and other academic staff) for g ood 
research.  
4. To encourage collaborative research  among st faculty of same and different disciplines of 
the Insti tute as none shall have teaching  load during summer.  
 
B. The Scheme  
 
1. The Fellowship s will be awarded to carry out research at IITGN during summer break. At 
least two months (60 days), preferably without break , should be devoted to the 
Fellowship work. However, it is understood that some faculty members may need to 
undertake a reasonable a mount of travel for official or semi -official purposes during the 
summer such as attending conferences, site visits for consulting projects, filed work for 
research, expert committees  etc., and such periods  will be counted within the 60 days of 
Fellowship period.  
 
2. The maximum Fellowship amount will be equal to the basic pay plus dearness allowance 
(excluding the transport allowance and the HRA) of the faculty member as of June 1 of 
the year, and payable for a period of two months, subject to funds availabil ity as outlined 
below.  
 
3. 25% of the total overheads charged to the externally funded research projects of the 
concerned faculty member will be available to him/her for covering the Summer 
Fellowship and other professional expenses; this account will be name d as Professional 
Development Account (PDA) and will be kept separate from the Rs 1 Lakh per year 
currently allowed to the faculty from MHRD funds for professional development as per 
sixth pay commission; the latter will be termed as Central Professional D evelopment 
Account (CPDA). The PDA amount will be cumulative and can be carried forward to the 
future years, but the Institute will not credit any interest to any funds carried forward. 
Considering that the faculty is allowed to earn honorarium from consul ting projects and 
continuing education programmes, no part of overheads from these will be transferred to 
the PDA.  
 
4. Half the sanctioned Fellowship amount can be charged to the PDA , subject to availability 
of funds in PDA. The amount charged to the PDA will  be matched equally from the 
donations and endowment interest, if available. Otherwise, payment of the entire 
Fellowship can be made from the PDA.  
 
5. An option will be available to the faculty members individually or jointly, to submit a Faculty Affairs Advisory 0 6(Version 1.0, July 2012)  Page 2 
 formal research proposal to the Institute explaining clearly the research work they will 
like to carry out for at least 60 days of summer break under the Fellowship. Such 
proposals will be examined by the Institute Standing Committee which may obtain 
review reports from d omain experts. If such a proposal is approved, the Institute will 
provide Fellowship amounting to 50% of basic pay and dearness allowance (as on 1st 
June of the year) from the donations/endowment, for a period of two months, without 
requiring the matching amount from PDA. This provision will be particularly useful for 
faculty members working in areas where sponsored research projects do not provide 
sufficient overheads etc. Such a proposal should be submitted wi th the Dean/Professor -
in-charge , R&D before 1stof February of the corresponding year.  
 
6. It is expected that the work carried out under the Fellowship through the “proposal route” 
will seed work that will eventually result in scholarly publications or technology 
development. All those who avail any funds for Summer Research through the research 
proposal route, must submit a report not later than October  31 of the same year. This 
repor t will be archived for future reference in consideration by the Institute for 
subsequent funding through the “proposal  route”.  
 
C. Illustrations : To better illustrate the scheme, some instances are summarized :  
 
a) A typical faculty member having plenty of projects will charge one month of 
Fellowship amount from PDA and an equal amount from the 
donations/endowment. The only exp ectations Institute will have from such a 
person is that he/she must spend two months of summer doing research at the 
Institute. Such a person need not write any research proposal.  
 
b) If a faculty member has limited external funds and can charge only 20 days  of 
Summer Fellowship to the PDA, the donation/endowment will provide another 20 
days of Summer Fellowship. However, in this instance also, the faculty member 
must devote a minimum of 60 days to the Fellowship. Such a faculty member 
need not write any rese arch proposal to the Institute.  
 
c) The faculty member mentioned in b) above may choose to write a research 
proposal to the Institute, and if such a proposal is approved , he/she may avail 20 
days of Summer Fellowship from PDA and 30 days from the 
donation/en dowment.  
 
d) A faculty member having no sponsored projects or having no overheads for PDA, 
may avail only one month of Summer Fellowship amount from the 
donation/endowment divided equally over two months, upon successful 
submission of the research proposal. I n this instance too, the faculty must spend 
a minimum of 60 days of summer break on research at the Institute.  
 
e) As the faculty shall be carrying out research work for at least 60 days of summer 
break, the concerned person shall be on official duty at the Institute during this 
period and thus provision of his/her annual vacation of 60 days or earned leave 
in lieu thereof, remains unaffected.  
  
Academic Affairs Advisory 01 ( Version 1.0, July 2012 ) Page 1 
 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORM S FOR ELECTIVE COURSES  
 
(Senate in its 9th Meeting held on 17th November 2011  approved the following ) 
 
Elective courses for the undergraduate programmes at IITGN are de-compartmentalized 
permitting students to opt for courses based on their interest, prior preparation and options 
exercised earlier.  In the context of electives, the origin of a course holds less importance 
compared to its ability to contribute to the stu dents’ overall progress in the programme of their 
undertaking . 
 
In addition, it is possible that a course:  
 
 Which is not generally offered by the same discipline but helps the students deepen their 
understanding in the core discipline, may also be consider ed for Honours  with the 
approval of the DPC and the DOAA.  
 Which is not generally offered by that particular discipline, but helps the students deepen 
their understanding in the core discipline, may also be considered for Minor  with the 
approval of the DPC and the DOAA.  
In effect, a course X offered by discipline A may be counted for Honors/Minor in discipline B if 
the faculty group related to discipline B feels that the objectives of course X give depth in any 
area of disciplin e B.  
 
No registrations will be permitted if there are time table clashes.  
 
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 33 (Version 1.0, May 2022)                                                Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
SPORTSPERSON -IN-RESIDENCE PROGRAM AT IIT GANDHINAGAR  
(As approved by the BoG in its 34th meeting held on 28 April 2022) 
 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 34th meeting held on 28 April 20 22 
approved Sportsperson -in-Residence program  to bring  exemplary sportspersons and 
coaches to the IITGN campus to engage with its students and the larger community.  
 
The Sportsperson -in-Residence program will host sportspersons and coaches who 
have demonstrated excellence in sports and games by  
 winning or participation at International sporting events like the Olympic/ 
Paralympic Games, World Championships/ World Cups, Asian Games, 
Commonwealth Games, etc.  
 winning or participati on at National sporting events recognized by official sports 
governing bodies in India.  
 
They will guide, train, and mentor the students and community members of IITGN. 
The program also aims to facilitate leadership, winning mindset, and strategy 
interacti ons integral to sports and games.  
 
The Sportsperson -in-Residence is expected to spend from a minimum of one week 
to four weeks at IIT Gandhinagar. Sportpersons and coaches from India or abroad, 
hosted under this scheme, may utilize the period in residence  to:  
 Train and mentor sportspersons of the community  
 On-field coaching in their respective sport or game  
 Offer courses on leadership, winning, and related topics  
 Conduct activities and events to promote sports, fitness, and wellness  
 
The Sportsperson -in-Residence are expected to acknowledge the support extended 
by IITGN in other activities during their engagement with the Institute (such as 
invitees to other events, as guest speakers, or other such activities). The Institute will 
consi der individual proposals for financial support to conduct activities and events to 
promote sports, fitness, and wellness.  
 
A sportsperson or a coach under this scheme will be selected by the Standing 
Committee on Faculty Affairs, which will evaluate nomina tions and proposals based 
on the candidate’s background, significance and potential impact of the visit, the 
clarity of objectives and schedule of activities, the proposed output, and plans for 
dissemination.  
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 27  (Version 1.0, June 2021 ) Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
Expectations from IIT Gandhinagar  faculty for  
appointment as Professors  
 
The expectations  for IITGN faculty members desiring Associate Professor ship at IITGN 
emphasize  demonstration of  research independence (through scholarly research output , 
graduation or near -graduation  of at least one PhD student, and external research funding), 
high-quality teaching , and notable service  to the Institute.  
  
Advancement  to the rank of Professor should not simply be  based on  “more of the same”  but 
rather go well beyond . In particular , a faculty member desiring  to be considered for the rank of 
Professor must also have demonstrated clear impact and recognition  for making a better 
Society  or Institute .  
 
More specific  expectations  from faculty members seeking the position of  Professor are : 
 
1. High -quality research contributions  
 
a. S/he must provide a  clear demonstration  of top -class  research conducted at IITGN . 
This may be established, for instance, through noteworthy  publications (papers, 
books, patents, technical reports, etc.) that do not include authors outside IITGN. 
While collaborative work with non-IITGN colleagues is appreciated, such work alone 
is not adequate .  
 
b. S/he must have had continued success in securing external research funds . High 
aspirations on this front, reflected  via a commitme nt to raise research funds  either 
individually or collaboratively, will be more  valued . In exceptional cases, if a faculty 
member can demonstrate that his/her research does not require funds for 
experimental or computational resources or field work, this criterion may be relaxed.  
 
c. S/he must have graduated  a substantial number of PhD students (4 to 6), with more 
expe cted in the future  through a pipeline of students . This number may be lower for 
some disciplines known for lower PhD student population  or for some faculty 
members who were directly appointed as Associate Professor.  
 
d. There should be s ome e vidence of his/her PhD students doing well  professionally  
after graduation. For instance, they may be in postdoctoral or faculty positions in 
reputed academic institutions, professionally well placed, be successful 
entrepreneurs, be making significant  societal contributions , etc.  
 
e. Formal  and/or informal research mentorship to junior colleagues  inside or outside 
the Institute  is generally expected .  
 
f. Exceptional leadership in service to the Institute provided by a faculty member would 
be appropriately factored in assessment of research contributions.  
 
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 27  (Version 1.0, June 2021 ) Page 2 
 2. Outstanding contributions to teaching  
 
a. S/he must have continued to teach a wide range of courses at all levels with good 
student ratings . 
 
b. S/he should have developed  new courses , and provided direction and leadership to 
improve  existing courses and programs . 
 
c. S/he must also have contributed to mentoring students, and making the classroom 
and non -classroom teaching more effective and enjoyable, thereby substantially 
(re)shaping the teach ing/learning environment in the discipline/ institute.  
 
3. Impact and recognition  
 
The impact that a faculty member has made to make a better Society  or Institute will be  
an important consideration .  
 
A. Making a better Society  may be demonstrated  via some of the following : 
 
a. There is a clearly visible societal transformation through his/her professional work.   
 
b. Technology developed by him/her  has led to significant changes in industrial 
processes, engineering and policy practices, technology transfer, licensing by 
companies, etc.  
 
c. The faculty member’s scholarly w ork has had a c onsiderable impact on 
education/learning in general. For instance, new  teaching methods  (e.g., MOOCs, 
online courses) , tools, technologies or textbooks developed by him/her are widely 
adopted by others in his/her  field and possibly outside it.  
 
The faculty member’s research has had a potentially lasting impact on his/her area of 
work. This may be corroborated by his/her visibility in the field, recognition by peers, 
national and international awards, etc.  
 
B. Making the Institute better may include : 
 
a. S/he has implemented innovations that have significantly improved  
teaching/learning/instruction at the I nstitute . 
 
b. His/Her  effort s have led to the creation of new initiatives/programmes/c entres that 
other institutes would wish to emulate . 
 
c. S/he has become an inspiration or a role model for students  and/or faculty.  
 
d. S/he has made a clear, positive contribution towards enhancing the  impact of the  
Institut e. 
 
e. S/he has provided exemplary leadership i n service to the Institute . Faculty Affairs Advisory 27  (Version 1.0, June 2021 ) Page 3 
  
 
In addition to the expectations mentioned above, a faculty member seeking an appointment at 
the position of Professor at IIT Gandhinagar must have been a good citizen of the Institute and 
must have worked collegially with other colleagues. Fur ther, the faculty member’s conduct with 
students in the classroom and outside must have been impeccable. S/he should have 
enthusiastically participated in Institute activities, including service on various committees and 
programs.  
 
In summary, a full Professor at IIT Gandhinagar should have made transformative 
contributions as an academic and must be someone who , through his/h er work, serves as a 
role model for  others within and ou tside the Institute .  
 
 
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 13 (Version 4.0, June  201 5) Page 1 of 2 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 PROVISION OF CPDA  AND PDA  TO MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in 1st meeting and  revised in 4th, 8th, 13th, and 16th meeting s) 
 
1. The implementation of the provision of Cumulative Professional Development Allowance 
(CPDA) as per Sixth Pay Commission was approved by the Board of Governors in its          
1st meeting held on 18 December 2009.  The approved scheme is as follows:  
 
1.1 A Cumulative Professional Development A llowance (CPDA ) of Rs 1,00,000 (Rs One 
Lakh) per year is made available to faculty members which can be used for travel to 
attend meetings in India and overseas, purchase of equipment and books, membership 
of professional societies, and other contingencies.  
 
1.2 A notio nal account will be created and maintained for every faculty member to manage 
the Professional Development Allowance. At the beginning of a financial year, Rs. 1 lakh 
will be credited to this account. All eligible expenses by the concerned faculty will be 
debited to this account. However, the accumulated amount into this account will not be 
allowed to exceed Rs 3 lakhs. For instance, if on 31st March an amount of Rs 2.5 lakh is 
available as a credit, on April 1st only a sum of Rs  0.5 lakh will be credited to the 
account.  
 
1.3 Expenses incurred by the faculty member for his/her professional development will be 
reimbursed against receipts upto the maximum of credit available in his/her notional 
account. In exceptional situations, th e Director may allow the balance in this account to 
go upto minus Rs 50,000, which shall be duly adjusted in the next year. Such a situation 
may arise, for instance, in case of international travel by a faculty member.  
 
1.4 When a faculty member first join s the Institute, the amount to be credited to his/her 
account will be prorated as per period of service in that financial year. For instance, if a 
person joins on January 1st, a sum of Rs 25,000 will be credited to his/her account upon 
joining (accounting year of the Institute is from April 1st of the current year to March 31st 
of the next year).  
 
1.5 The CPDA  will also be applicable for faculty members on contract and the visiting faculty 
provided that (a) the faculty member is working full -time with the Institute, and (b) his/her 
expected stay with the Institute is of one year or longer duration.  
 
2. The Board i n its fourth meeting held on 03 September 2011 approved a scheme of 
Professional Development Account (PDA) in the R&D accounts for every faculty 
member.  
 
The PDA comprises 25% of the total overhead charged to the externally funded research 
projects of the concerned faculty member. The amount in PDA is available to him/her for 
covering various professional expenses. The PDA amount is cumulative and can be carried 
forward to future years without any limits.  
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 13 (Version 4.0, June  201 5) Page 2 of 2 
 3. For efficient processing and ease in monitoring of the CPDA and the PDA accounts, 
the Board in its 8th meeting held on 3rd December 2012, approved the following norms:  
 
3.1 Both CPDA and PDA be managed through R&D accounts.  
3.2 Ledger pages for every facul ty be opened to show details of CPDA and PDA 
separately.  
3.3 At beginning of the financial year, the CPDA amount of Rs one lac per faculty be 
transferred from the Main Account to the R&D account for all faculty members on roll 
after making adjustment for t hose who left or joined during the preceding year.  
 
4. The Board in its 13th meeting held on 14 March 2014 , approved the following norms  
with regard to procurement of items from CPDA and PDA:  
 
The fund available under CPDA/PDA are to  be utilized by the faculty member towards his/her 
professional development. This may include expenses towards participation in conferences and 
visits of academic nature as well as for procurement of items like consumables, computer, laptop, 
tablets, cell phon e, books etc. As m any of these items procured from CPDA/PDA are of small 
book value and are part of limited time asset :  
4.1 A separate Central Register will be created.  
4.2 All items costing more than Rs. 50,000/ - will be entered in this Central Register.  
4.3 Items will be assumed to have very little or negligible disposal value at the end of 3 years.  
4.4 However, if he/she leaves the Institute before such items are  three years old, he/she 
may keep the item by paying either 10% of the original purchase value or the 
depreciated value of the item, whichever is less.  
 
5. The board in its 1 6th meeting held on 21 April 2015, approved the following norms with 
regard to providing matching funds to Professional Development Account  of faculty 
for certain transfers  
 
For some of the institute activities, such as participation in JEE, GATE and such other 
examinations, the faculty is provided honorarium. Also, for teaching in the summer term, the 
Institute provides some honorarium. These amounts are quite modest and in many instances 
the concerned faculty member may prefer not to draw the honorarium but to utilize the 
amount towards their professional activities. These activities t ake away from faculty their 
research time or personal time but these activities are critical for the Institute. Hence, to 
encourage participation of faculty in such activities, the Board approved that whenever the 
concerned person chooses to divert such am ounts to their Professional Development Account 
(PDA), the Institute will also transfer a matching amount to PDA; the amount thus incurred will 
be charged to the R&D Fund of the Institute.  
 Acad emic Affairs Advisory 31(Version 1.0, August  2014)                                                                 Page 1 
  
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR TA/DA TO STUDENTS FOR DOMESTIC AND  
INTERNATIONAL TRA VEL  
 
(As approved by Board of Governors in its 13th meeting held on 14th March 2014)  
 
 
Norms for Domestic Travel:  TA/DA of students on domestic trav el can be regulated by forming 
following two categories:  
 
Category of Students  Entitlement  
Ph.D and M.Tech Students  Equal to and as per the Govt. of India norms for TA/DA 
entitlement of entry level Group ‘A’ officials, i.e., Grade  
Pay of Rs.5400/ - and 660 0/-. 
Other than Ph.D and 
M.Tech  
Students  Equal to and as per the Govt. of India norms for TA/DA 
entitlement of Group ‘B’ officials (i.e. Grade Pay of  
Rs.4200/ -, 4600/ - & 4800/ -). 
 
According to the above norms, the present entitlement is as follows (subje ct to submission of original 
tickets, boarding passes if applicable, and bills):  
 
Category of 
Students  Travel by 
Air Travel by 
Train  Travel by Road  Hostel/Hotel 
Charges 
per Day 
(Max)  Full Bill per 
Day (Max)  
Ph.D and 
M.Tech 
Students  Economy 
Class by Air 
India AC-II Tier  Ordinary Taxi, 
Auto/  
AC Bus  Rs. 2250/ - Rs. 300/ - 
Other than 
Ph.D and 
M.Tech  
Students  Not Eligible  AC-II Tier/  
AC Chair 
Car Ordinary Taxi/ 
Auto rickshaw/ 
Any Public Bus 
incl. AC  
Bus Rs. 750/ - Rs. 225/ - 
 
Note: The above mentioned entitlement  is subject to maximum financial support approved by the 
Institute.  
 
Norms for International Travel:  All the students going on international tour/visit will be 
paid/reimbursed Air Fare in Economy Class, Expenditure incurred on Health Insurance, Visa Fee an d 
Registration charges (if any) on actual expenditure basis. In addition, their DA (Daily Allowances) 
which includes local transportation and stay will be regulated as under:  
 Acad emic Affairs Advisory 31(Version 1.0, August  2014)                                                                 Page 2 
 Sl. 
No. Country of Visit  DA without any 
voucher  DA on production of vouchers  
1 US/ Canada/ Europe/ 
Japan/New Zealand/ 
Australia  USD 80 per day  (a) Upto US $90 per day for 
stay and  
(b) Fixed US $30 as OPE (out 
of pocket expenditure)  
2 Countries other than 
mentioned as Sl. No. 1 
above  USD 50 per day  (a) Upto US $60 per day for 
stay and 
(b) Fixed US $20 as OPE (out 
of pocket expenditure)  
 
Note: The DA will be paid for the days of conference/seminar/lecture/event and one day each prefix 
and suffix to the conference.  
 
Above norms do not necessarily mean that the Institute is committed to providing full funding. The 
Institute may set a lower limit for funding or provide partial financial support on a case to case basis.  
 
 Academic Affairs Advisory 3 (Version 3.0, October 2023)                          Page 1  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  ATTENDANCE POLICY  (As approved by Senate in its 62nd meeting held on 27th December 2022 and  in its 66th meeting held on 16th October 2023)   • The Institute does not prescribe any attendance policy and all decisions pertaining to attendance related issues are entirely left at the instructor’s discretion.  • The instructors are free to prescribe a reasonable attendance policy and announce it to students at the beginning of the course. Students who do not meet the minimum attendance as prescribed by the instructor may be awarded a fail grade for lack of attendance, irrespective of their performance in the course.   • Self-learning mode is no longer applicable.  • Two percentage relaxation in attendance will be applicable for female students for all courses in which an instructor prescribes an attendance policy [Ref: Senate 2023.4.17].    
Faculty Affairs Advisory  28 (version 1.0 , June 2021 ) Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
FACULTY LEADERSHIP & SERVICE POLICY  
 
 
Faculty play a critical  role in shared governance at any top educational institution.  The 
faculty build and maintain traditions, culture, and mutual expectations in the campus 
community through their everyday actions and behaviour. The Institute values faculty 
contributions to institutional development . It encourages development of, and com mitment 
to constructive leadership by the members of its faculty. Besides helping their professional 
development and personal advancement, such leadership promotes excellence in the 
cause of higher education as well as inspire the generation of young stude nts to achieve 
their maximum potential and become leaders in their own right. Therefore, in addition to  
research and instruction, leadership and  service to the  discipline, Institute , and the 
profession are essential  component s of expectations from Faculty at IITGN  and are 
factored in all faculty evaluation and promotion decisions.  
 
Service Expectations  
 
The Institute expects faculty members to allocate 20% of their time to leadership and  
service activities , and it allocates 20% weightage to this component in a faculty  member’s 
overall performance  evaluation . The leadership and s ervice expectation may be met 
through  contribution s to Institute service as well as service to the community and the 
profession . However, the dominant component of such service is ex pected at the 
Institutional , discipline or community  level. Some forms o f external professional service  
(such as contributions to  policymaking  or professional bodies at Institutional request,  
contributing to Institutional ly sponsored -- as opposed to personally dri ven -- outreach 
efforts,  etc.) may count toward Institutional service.  
 
Faculty members are expected to identify and develop opportunities for service 
contributions on their own and are encouraged to be enterprising in developing new 
programm es and initiatives that contribute to Institutional development, their discipline, 
profession or the campus community. In case faculty members are unable to identify 
opportunities by themselves, they may seek the help of Associate Dean (Faculty Relations).  
Any activity carried out by the faculty member, which contributes towards advancing their 
research profile will not be counted towards service requirements. Further, p rofessional 
service contributions counted in the service category will not be factored u nder research 
evaluation . 
 
Faculty should  demonstrate progressivel y greater leadership  and active involvement in 
service over time at the Institute. Candidates for promotion to full professor are expected to 
demonstrate high levels of service and leadership in discipline or Institute programs  or in 
professional bodies . Membership or appointment to a particular position alone is not 
evidence of service. Faculty members  are expected  to provide a des cription of the nature, 
quantity and time commitment for each service as well as documentation of their specific 
contributions  and impact.   
 
Evaluation of Service  
 
The service contributions of faculty members will be evaluated  based on their effectiveness 
and impact  and the enthusiastic recommendations from their peers to be included in   
Faculty Affairs Advisory  28 (version 1.0 , June 2021 ) Page 2 
 leadership/administrative/service role s. This will be c onsidered in all evaluation and 
promotion decisions. Faculty are expected to meet satisfactory service standards unless 
relief from service has been sought and granted.   
 
Relief from Service  
 
a) Faculty members may request temporary relief from the service expectation for 
transient personal or professional considerations (such as health,  family, past  
extensiv e service contributions, pressing research or professional demands, etc.).  
b) Faculty members who do not wish to participate in service, may request for relief 
from service in lieu of more teaching, wherever possible.  
c) Faculty members who are not able to contribute effectively to service  or had weak 
service participation in the past  may make a request for a reduced service 
contribution, with a corresponding increase in teaching load. Faculty members are 
expected to assess their service contributions and re quest for this additional 
teaching load  apriori . 
 
Requests for such relief s will be considered  on a case -by-case basis  and the request may 
be sent to Associate Dean (Faculty Relations) . If granted, such relief is for a specific and 
limited duration. In abs ence of such an approval, all faculty are expected to satisfy the 
service requirements . 
 
Workload Relief  and Support  for Leadership and Service  
 
The Institute relies upon the service contributions by its faculty to lead and run critical 
academic and administrative operations. It is committed to nurturing faculty service and 
leadership opportunities and providing professional and administrative deve lopment support 
to faculty to advance their leadership potential. At the same time, t he Institute expects all 
faculty to meet high standards of  research and  teaching performance, including from faculty 
who may be  dedicating disproportionate effort s on Institutional service.  
 
Faculty members serving in m ajor administ rative capacities  may need to spend 
substantially higher time than the 20% service expectation  of all faculty. To ensure that the 
research and professional activities of such faculty members  are not compromised, the 
Institute may provide  teaching load relief and/or research or professional  leave , travel 
support, etc. , to enable them to nurture and stay abreast of  their professional and research 
aspirations . The determina tion of teaching load relief, research or professional leave  or 
other forms of support  is made on a case -by-case basis by the Director based  on the 
administrative workload  and contributions  of the faculty member . 
 
For any clarification  regarding this facul ty leadership and service policy, the contact person 
will be Associate Dean (Faculty Relations).  General Administration Advisory 14 (Version 2.0, December 2021 ) Page 1 of 1 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 
REIMBURSEMENT OF MEDICAL EXPENSES  
 
 
IIT Gandhinagar provides medical facility as well as reimbursement of medical 
expenses  to the regular faculty and staff of the Institute. For smooth process ing of 
reimbursemen t of the medical expenses , a standard procedure is being worked out. 
For the interim period, it has been decided to follow the procedure given below:  
 
1. The claims for reimbursement of medical expenses are required to be submit ted 
in the prescribed IPD/ OPD forms of the Institute  within three months (i.e.  90 
days). However, delay in submission of such claim  due to unavoidable 
circumstances may be addressed to appropriate authorities for consideration for 
reimbursement on case to case basis on discretion of th eir judgment of merit.  
2. Claims for medical reimbursement will be processe d twice a month. claims  
received at  the Institute admin istrative  section upto 5th of a month will be 
reimbursed tentatively by end of the same month; while claims  received from 6th 
up to 20th of the month will be processed tentatively by 15th of the following month 
provided there is no inaccuracy in the submissions . 
3. All claims  after review of the IITGN consultant doctor and after verification by 
internal audit , will go to the account s section for payment.  
4. All bills and receipts of the medicines and services (such as pathology, X -ray etc.) 
are required to be submitted in original while the supporting prescription of the 
specialist doctor/ IITGN doctor can be submitted in photocopy.  If a perso n is 
referred to specialist consultant by the IITGN doctor, copy of the reference letter 
should also be submitted along with the bills for reimbursement.  
5. Admissibility  of reimbursement will be  as provided in the General Administration 
Advisory No. 27 . 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Academic Affairs Advisory 06 (Version 1.0, July 2012)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORM S FOR PGDIIT PROGRAMME  
 
(Senate in its 4th Meeting held on 2nd December 2010  approved the following)  
 
There are several industries in the neighborhood of this institute and professionals working 
there are quite often unable to spend the necessary duration on campus to fulfill the 
requirements of an M.Tech. programme. Also, several aspirants are observed to  show 
genuine interest in advancing their knowledge and qualification  in spite of a long break after 
B.Tech.  The Post-Graduate Diploma of IIT( PGDIIT ) programme can be use ful as a stepping 
stone for such professionals  to assess themselves for higher studies  and improve their 
technical understanding and skills in the process.  
 
Salient Features of Programme  
 Working professio nals with industrial experience and Bachelor’s degree in 
Engineering/Technology/Architecture/Pharmacy or Master’s degree in any branch of  
Science/ Mathematics/ Statistics/ Computer Applications or equivalent will be eligible to 
apply.  
 Industry sponsorship is not mandatory for admission to this programme. However, 
candidates are encouraged to get a support from industry for them to pursue th is 
programme.  
 To encourage professionals from small and mediu m scale industries, fees for PG DIIT 
candidates will initially be the same as those for M.Tech students so that they can derive 
the benefits from this program.  
 The admission procedure for PGDIIT p rogramme should be defined by the individual 
disciplines (it may, for example, consist of a written test and/or an interview)  
 A candidate pursuing PGDIIT should successfully finish the coursework requirement of 
32 credits (equivalent of 8 courses) with a m inimum CPI of at least 5.0 for award of the 
diploma.  
 The PGDIIT programme may include a minor Project (12 credits).  
 A candidate can choose the courses of his/her choice from the pool of courses being 
offered for the regular M.Tech programme.  
 However, individual disciplines may offer specialized PGDIIT programme, where they will 
prescribe the minimum number of courses from the area of specializations. This will lead 
to an award of PGDIIT in that particular discipline or specialization.  
 A candi date can design his/her own course work apart from the bare minimum courses 
prescribed by the institutes (e.g. A course in communication skills can be a compulsory 
course)  
 PGDIIT programme can be a full time (4 courses per semester) or a part -time 
programm e (at least 2 or more courses per semester). However, it has to be completed 
in a maximum period of 3 years.   
Academic Affairs Advisory 06 (Version 1.0, July 2012)  Page 2 
  In a long -term, PGDIIT course work can suitably be developed in collaboration with 
reputed research organizations/institutes/industries to suit the ir needs.  
 
 A candidate enrolled in PGDIIT can apply to enroll for M.Tech degree provided he/she 
earns SPI of 6.0 and above, and CPI of 6.5 and above. Once admitted to M.Tech 
programme, such candidates will have to fulfil the requirement of M.Tech thesis/pr oject 
for an award of M.Tech degree.  
 
 I N D I A N
I N S T I T U T E
O F
T E C H N O L O G Y
G A N D H I N A G A R
A d v i s o r y
o n
t h e
u s e
o f
t h e
e O f f i c e
S y s t e m
1 .
I n t r o d u c t i o n
I I T
G a n d h i n a g a r
h a s
i m p l e m e n t e d
t h e
e O f f i c e
p r o c e d u r e
f r o m
A p r i l
2 0 ,
2 0 2 3 ,
t o
f a s t - t r a c k
t h e
a d m i n i s t r a t i v e
p r o c e d u r e s
a n d
t o
m a i n t a i n
r e c o r d s
i n
d i g i t a l
f o r m a t
a s
p e r
t h e
g o v e r n m e n t ’ s
v i s i o n
o f
D i g i t a l
I n d i a .
T h e
N a t i o n a l
I n f o r m a t i c s
C e n t e r
d e v e l o p e d
t h e
p o r t a l
e O f f i c e ,
w h i c h
m a n y
g o v e r n m e n t
o r g a n i z a t i o n s
u s e .
T h i s
a d v i s o r y
h i g h l i g h t s
t h e
k e y
p r i n c i p l e s
a n d
t i p s
a b o u t
u s i n g
t h e
e O f f i c e
s y s t e m
f o r
I I T
G a n d h i n a g a r
u s e r s .
T h e r e
a r e
m u l t i p l e
f u n c t i o n s
a n d
o p t i o n s
a v a i l a b l e
i n
t h e
e O f f i c e
p o r t a l ,
n o t
a l l
o f
t h e m
a r e
a p p l i c a b l e
t o
u s ,
a n d
h e n c e
i t
i s
a d v i s a b l e
t o
f o l l o w
t h e
g u i d e l i n e s
g i v e n
i n
t h i s
d o c u m e n t
f o r
e a s y
w o r k .
2 .
W h i c h
d o c u m e n t s
a r e
t o
b e
i n i t i a t e d
o n
t h e
e O f f i c e
s y s t e m
A l l
p a p e r w o r k
o t h e r
t h a n
p r o c e s s e s
a l r e a d y
o n
I M S
a r e
t o
b e
i n i t i a t e d
o n
t h e
e O f f i c e
s y s t e m .
T h e s e
m a y
r a n g e
f r o m
s i m p l e
o n e - p a g e
a p p r o v a l
n o t e s
t o
c o m p l e t e
p u r c h a s e
f i l e s .
S o m e
c o m m o n
e x a m p l e s
i n c l u d e :
1 .
P P R F
a n d
a l l
a s s o c i a t e d
p u r c h a s e
p a p e r w o r k
2 .
P O R F
3 .
A p p r o v a l
N o t e s
4 .
P a y m e n t
V o u c h e r s
5 .
M e a l
O r d e r
F o r m
6 .
V e h i c l e
R e q u i s i t i o n
F o r m
7 .
G u e s t
H o u s e
R e s e r v a t i o n
F o r m
8 .
M e d i c a l
R e i m b u r s e m e n t
B i l l s
9 .
e t c .
A l l
t h e
p r o c e s s e s
a l r e a d y
c o v e r e d
o n
I M S
( s u c h
a s
l e a v e
a p p l i c a t i o n s ,
c h i l d r e n
e d u c a t i o n
a l l o w a n c e ,
t e l e p h o n e
r e i m b u r s e m e n t s ,
c o u r s e
r e g i s t r a t i o n ,
c o u r s e
m a n a g e m e n t ,
e t c . )
w i l l
c o n t i n u e
t o
b e
p r o c e s s e d
t h r o u g h
I M S
a n d
t h e r e
a r e
n o
p l a n s
t o
m o v e
t h o s e
t o
t h e
e O f f i c e
s y s t e m .
3 .
G e n e r a l
p r i n c i p l e s
o f
i n i t i a t i n g / m o v i n g
d o c u m e n t s
o n
t h e
e O f f i c e
s y s t e m
3 . 1 .
A l l
d o c u m e n t s
a r e
t o
b e
m o v e d
f o r
a p p r o v a l s
a n d
r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
a s
F i l e s
3 . 1 . 1 .
T o
d o
t h i s ,
f i r s t
u p l o a d
P D F
o r
s o f t c o p y
o f
t h e
d o c u m e n t
a s
a
R e c e i p t
3 . 1 . 2 .
T h e n
c r e a t e
a
F i l e
3 . 1 . 3 .
T h e n
a d d
t h e
R e c e i p t
t h a t
w a s
c r e a t e d
t o
t h e
F i l e
u s i n g
t h e
A d d
R e c e i p t
b u t t o n
o n
t h e
r i g h t
p a n e l
i n
t h e
F i l e
v i e w .
3 . 1 . 4 .
P l e a s e
r e v i e w
t h e
D o s
a n d
D o n ’ t s
s e c t i o n
t o
a v o i d
v a r i o u s
c o m m o n
m i s t a k e s
a n d
p i t f a l l s
r e l a t e d
t o
t h e
a b o v e
s t e p s .
3 . 2 .
A l l
t h e
n o t i n g s
o n
t h e
G r e e n
N o t e
a r e
o f f i c i a l
n o t i n g s
o n
t h e
f i l e .
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
G e n e r a l
A d m i n i s t r a t i o n
A d v i s o r y
2 8
( V e r s i o n
1 . 0 ,
M a y
2 0 2 3 )
13 . 3 .
T h e
i n i t i a t o r
m u s t
s i g n
u s i n g
a n y
o f
t h e
a c c e p t a b l e
m e t h o d s ,
t h e
r e s t
o f
t h e
r e c o m m e n d e r
o r
a p p r o v e r s
i n
t h e
c h a i n
o f
m o v e m e n t
o f
t h e
d o c u m e n t
o n l y
n e e d
t o
n o t e
t h e i r
r e c o m m e n d a t i o n
o r
a p p r o v a l
i n
t h e
g r e e n
s h e e t
( a s
l o n g
a s
t h e
d o c u m e n t
i s
m o v i n g
w i t h i n
t h e
o r g a n i z a t i o n ) .
4 .
H o w
t o
s e n d
d o c u m e n t s
t h r o u g h
t h e
e O f f i c e
s y s t e m
O p t i o n
1
( p r e f e r r e d ) :
P D F s
o f
f i l l e d - u p
f o r m s
o r
d o c u m e n t s
f o r
a p p r o v a l
i s
u p l o a d e d
o n
e O f f i c e
a s
a
R e c e i p t ,
a n d
t h e n
t h i s
r e c e i p t
i s
a d d e d
t o
a
F i l e
t h a t
i s
c r e a t e d
a n d
s e n t
a s
a
F i l e
w i t h
a
d i g i t a l
s i g n a t u r e
(
‘ e s i g n
a n d
s e n d ’
o p t i o n )
o n
t h e
G r e e n
N o t e
t o
t h e
n e x t
p e r s o n
i n
t h e
c h a i n
o f
t h e
a p p r o v a l
p r o c e s s .
S u b s e q u e n t
r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
a n d
a p p r o v a l s
a r e
n o t e d
o n
t h e
G r e e n
S h e e t
( n o
n e e d
f o r
d i g i t a l
s i g n a t u r e ) .
O p t i o n
2 :
A n
i n i t i a t o r
i n k - s i g n s
a
p h y s i c a l
p a p e r
( f i l l e d - u p
f o r m
o r
a
d o c u m e n t ) ,
a n d
t h e n
a
s c a n n e d
v e r s i o n
o f
t h i s
P D F
i s
u p l o a d
o n
e O f f i c e
a s
a
R e c e i p t ,
a n d
t h e n
t h i s
r e c e i p t
i s
a d d e d
t o
a
F i l e
t h a t
i s
c r e a t e d
a n d
s e n t
a s
a
F i l e
t o
t h e
n e x t
p e r s o n
i n
t h e
c h a i n
o f
t h e
a p p r o v a l
p r o c e s s
( n o
n e e d
f o r
d i g i t a l
s i g n a t u r e
i n
t h i s
c a s e ) .
S u b s e q u e n t
r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
a n d
a p p r o v a l s
a r e
n o t e d
o n
t h e
G r e e n
N o t e
( n o
n e e d
f o r
d i g i t a l
s i g n a t u r e ) .
O p t i o n
3 :
F o r
s i m p l e
a p p r o v a l s ,
a n
i n i t i a t o r
c a n
c o p y
t h e
e n t i r e
d o c u m e n t
a n d
p u t
i t
a s
t e x t
i n
G r e e n
n o t e
a n d
t h e n
s e n d
i t
t o
t h e
n e x t
p e r s o n
i n
t h e
c h a i n
o f
t h e
a p p r o v a l
p r o c e s s
w i t h
a
d i g i t a l
s i g n a t u r e
(
‘ e s i g n
a n d
s e n d ’
o p t i o n )
o n
t h e
G r e e n
N o t e .
S u b s e q u e n t
r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
a n d
a p p r o v a l s
a r e
n o t e d
o n
t h e
G r e e n
N o t e
( n o
n e e d
f o r
d i g i t a l
s i g n a t u r e ) .
5 .
W h o m
t o
s e n d
D o c u m e n t s
n e e d
t o
b e
s e n t
d i r e c t l y
t o
t h e
n e x t
r e c o m m e n d i n g / a p p r o v i n g
a u t h o r i t y
i n
t h e
c h a i n
o f
t h e
a p p r o v a l
p r o c e s s
( e . g .
f o r
p r o c u r e m e n t
u s i n g
d i s c i p l i n e
f u n d s ,
i n i t i a t o r
c a n
s e n d
t h e
f i l e
t o
t h e
d i s c i p l i n e
c o o r d i n a t o r ) .
T h e
r e c o m m e n d i n g
a u t h o r i t y
w i l l
s e n d
i t
d i r e c t l y
t o
t h e
n e x t
r e c o m m e n d i n g
a u t h o r i t y
o r
a p p r o v i n g
a u t h o r i t y .
I n
m o s t
c a s e s ,
t h e
f i n a l
a p p r o v i n g
a u t h o r i t y
c a n
r e t u r n
t h e
d o c u m e n t
t o
t h e
i n d e n t e r
a f t e r
a p p r o v i n g
i t .
I n
s o m e
c a s e s
( e . g .
p a y m e n t
v o u c h e r ) ,
t h e
a p p r o v i n g
a u t h o r i t y
m a y
s e n d
t h e
a p p r o v e d
d o c u m e n t
d i r e c t l y
t o
t h e
a p p r o p r i a t e
u n i t
t h a t
h a n d l e s
f i n a l
p r o c e s s i n g
( e . g .
p a y m e n t
v o u c h e r
s e n t
t o
a c c o u n t s
f o r
p r o c e s s i n g
o f
p a y m e n t ) .
6 .
G e n e r a l
D o s
a n d
D o n ’ t s
6 . 1 .
D o
n o t
a t t a c h
a
P D F
f i l e
t o
a
F i l e
u s i n g
A t t a c h
b u t t o n
o r
A t t a c h m e n t
b u t t o n ,
a l w a y s
a d d
P D F
f i l e s
u s i n g
A d d
R e c e i p t
.
P l s
s e e
t h e
s c r e e n s h o t
b e l o w .
6 . 2 .
D o
n o t
i n c l u d e
a n y b o d y
i n
“ c c ”
w h i l e
s e n d i n g
a n y
k i n d
o f
f i l e .
6 . 3 .
D o
n o t
s e n d
a n y
d o c u m e n t
a s
a
d r a f t
o r
a
r e c e i p t
( u n l e s s
i t
i s
f o r
i n t e r n a l
d i s c u s s i o n
b e f o r e
f i n a l i z a t i o n )
6 . 4 .
D o
s e n d
d o c u m e n t s
a s
a
f i l e
( n o t
a s
r e c e i p t
o r
d r a f t ) .
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
G e n e r a l
A d m i n i s t r a t i o n
A d v i s o r y
2 8
( V e r s i o n
1 . 0 ,
M a y
2 0 2 3 )
26 . 5 .
D o
e - s i g n
( o r
i n k
s i g n
a n d
s c a n
a n d
u p l o a d )
t h e
f i l l e d
u p
f o r m
o r
d o c u m e n t
i f
y o u
a r e
t h e
i n d e n t e r / i n i t i a t o r
.
A l l
o t h e r s
c a n
s i m p l y
m a r k
t h e i r
r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
o r
a p p r o v a l
i n
g r e e n
n o t e .
N o
n e e d
f o r
e l e c t r o n i c
s i g n a t u r e .
P l e a s e
n o t e
t h a t
e l e c t r o n i c
s i g n a t u r e
i s
e s s e n t i a l
f o r
a n y
d o c u m e n t
t h a t
i s
b e i n g
s e n t
o u t s i d e
t h e
o r g a n i z a t i o n
( l i k e
P O ,
i n v o i c e ,
o r
c e r t i f i c a t e s ,
e t c . ) ,
b u t
t h e s e
w i l l
b e
h a n d l e d
b y
a p p r o p r i a t e
u n i t s
( a n d
t h e
a v e r a g e
u s e r
n e e d
n o t
c o n c e r n
t h e m s e l v e s
w i t h
t h i s
a s p e c t ) .
6 . 6 .
D o
s e n d
t h e
f i l e
d i r e c t l y
t o
t h e
n e x t
r e c o m m e n d i n g / a p p r o v i n g
a u t h o r i t y
i n s t e a d
o f
s e n d i n g
i t
b a c k
t o
t h e
i n i t i a t o r .
6 . 7 .
C l i c k
h e r e
t o
s e e
t h e
i m a g e
f o r
r e f e r e n c e .
7 .
S t e p - b y - s t e p
g u i d e
t o
c r e a t i n g
R e c e i p t s
&
F i l e s
7 . 1 .
C r e a t e
a
r e c e i p t
7 . 1 . 1 .
R e c e i p t
>
C r e a t e
>
E l e c t r o n i c
7 . 1 . 2 .
U p l o a d
t h e
d o c u m e n t
i n
P D F
f o r m a t
7 . 1 . 3 .
F i l l
d i a r y
d e t a i l s ,
C o n t a c t
d e t a i l s
a n d
c a t e g o r y
a n d
s u b j e c t
d e t a i l s
7 . 1 . 4 .
C l i c k
o n
“ G e n e r a t e ”
7 . 1 . 5 .
T h e
g e n e r a t e d
r e c e i p t
n e e d s
t o
b e
a t t a c h e d
t o
a
f i l e
( r e f e r
n e x t
s t e p
f o r
h o w
t o
c r e a t e
a
f i l e
a n d
a d d
r e c e i p t )
7 . 1 . 6 .
C l i c k
h e r e
t o
s e e
i m a g e .
7 . 2 .
C r e a t e
a
f i l e
7 . 2 . 1 .
F i l e >
C r e a t e
7 . 2 . 2 .
F i l l
r e q u i r e d
d e t a i l s
i n
t h e
f o r m
7 . 2 . 3 .
C l i c k
c o n t i n u e
W o r k i n g
7 . 2 . 4 .
C l i c k
h e r e
t o
s e e
i m a g e .
7 . 2 . 5 .
A d d
r e c e i p t
( O p t i o n
g i v e n
i n
r i g h t
d o w n
s i d e
o f
p a g e )
w h i c h
y o u
h a v e
c r e a t e d
i n
t h e
r e c e i p t
( C l i c k
h e r e
t o
s e e
i m a g e )
7 . 2 . 6 .
A d d
c o m m e n t s
i n
t h e
G r e e n
s h e e t
7 . 2 . 7 .
Y o u
c a n
u s e
y e l l o w
s h e e t
a s
t e m p o r a r y
c o m m e n t s
t o
m a k e
a n y
c h a n g e s
7 . 2 . 8 .
S e n d
t h e
f i l e
t o
t h e
c o n c e r n e d
a u t h o r i t y
7 . 2 . 9 .
I n i t i a t o r
n e e d
t o
s i g n
b e f o r e
s e n d i n g ,
s i g n
o p t i o n
w i l l
a p p e a r
w h e n
y o u
c l i c k
s e n d
b u t t o n
( C l i c k
h e r e
t o
s e e
i m a g e )
7 . 2 . 1 0 .
O f f i c i a l s
w h o
a r e
r e c o m m e n d i n g
t h e
f i l e
c a n
s i m p l y
r e c o r d
t h e i r
r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
i n
G r e e n
N o t e
a n d
s e n d
i t
t o
n e x t
c o n c e r n e d
o f f i c i a l
7 . 2 . 1 1 .
T h e
f i n a l
a p p r o v i n g
a u t h o r i t y
c a n
a p p r o v e
t h e
f i l e
a n d
s e n d
i t
b a c k
t o
t h e
i n i t i a t o r
7 . 2 . 1 2 .
F o r
p u r c h a s e
r e l a t e d
f i l e s
( a n d
o t h e r
m u l t i
d o c u m e n t
p r o c e s s e s ) ,
s u b s e q u e n t
r e p o r t s
a n d
a p p r o v a l s
c a n
b e
a d d e d
t o
t h e
s a m e
f i l e
b y
j u s t
c r e a t i n g
a
n e w
r e c e i p t
a n d
a t t a c h
i t
t o
t h e
c u r r e n t
f i l e
7 . 2 . 1 3 .
W h i l e
a t t a c h i n g
n e w
r e c e i p t
t o
t h e
c u r r e n t
f i l e s ,
i t
i s
a d v i s e d
t o
l i n k
t h e
p a g e
n u m b e r s
t o
r e m a r k
i n
t h e
g r e e n
n o t e
s o
r e c o m m e n d i n g / a p p r o v i n g
o f f i c i a l
c a n
e a s i l y
g e t
t o
t h e
n e w
d o c u m e n t
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
G e n e r a l
A d m i n i s t r a t i o n
A d v i s o r y
2 8
( V e r s i o n
1 . 0 ,
M a y
2 0 2 3 )
38 .
C l o s i n g
F i l e s
8 . 1 .
T h i s
f e a t u r e
i s
s t i l l
b e i n g
o p e r a t i o n a l i z e d .
9 .
S i g n a t u r e
O p t i o n s
T h e r e
a r e
t w o
o p t i o n s
t o
d i g i t a l l y
s i g n
t h e
d o c u m e n t s :
9 . 1 .
A a d h a r
O T P :
D o c u m e n t s
c a n
b e
s i g n e d
d i g i t a l l y
b y
e n t e r i n g
A a d h a r
d e t a i l s .
9 . 2 .
D S C :
F r e q u e n t
s i g n a t o r i e s
c a n
s i g n
d o c u m e n t s
d i g i t a l l y
w i t h
t h e
D S C
p r o v i d e d
t o
t h e m
b y
I S T F .
1 0 .
L o g i n
P o l i c y
1 0 . 1 .
T h e
r e g u l a r
s t a f f
o f
t h e
I n s t i t u t e
h a s
b e e n
g i v e n
l o g i n
c r e d e n t i a l s
f o r
t h e
e - o f f i c e
p o r t a l .
1 0 . 2 .
I I T
G a n d h i n a g a r
h a s
a p p o i n t e d
s o m e
s t a f f
m e m b e r s
o n
a
c o n t r a c t u a l
b a s i s ,
s o m e
o f
w h o m
m a y
r e q u i r e
l o g i n
c r e d e n t i a l s
f o r
t h e
s m o o t h
f u n c t i o n i n g
o f
I n s t i t u t e
w o r k .
1 0 . 3 .
S u c h
c o n t r a c t u a l
e m p l o y e e s
w h o
r e q u i r e
l o g i n
c r e d e n t i a l s
f o r
t h e
e - o f f i c e
m a y
b e
p r o v i d e d
w i t h
l o g i n
c r e d e n t i a l s
o n
t h e
a p p r o v a l
o f
D e a n
G A
o r
R e g i s t r a r
t h r o u g h
t h e
r e c o m m e n d a t i o n
o f
t h e i r
r e p o r t i n g
o f f i c e r ,
o n
a
c a s e - b y - c a s e
b a s i s .
V i d e o
L i n k s
f o r
R e f e r e n c e
S r . 
N o .
S u b j e c t
V i d e o 
L i n k
1
S i n g l e
A p p r o v a l
N o t e
L i n k
2
B a s i c
A p p r o v a l
w i t h
O p t i o n
1
L i n k
3
B a s i c
A p p r o v a l
w i t h
O p t i o n
2
L i n k
4
B a s i c
A p p r o v a l
w i t h
O p t i o n
3
L i n k
4
A d d i n g
C o m m i t t e e
R e p o r t
t o
E x i s t i n g
F i l e
L i n k
5
P a y m e n t
V o u c h e r
P r o c e s s
L i n k
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
G e n e r a l
A d m i n i s t r a t i o n
A d v i s o r y
2 8
( V e r s i o n
1 . 0 ,
M a y
2 0 2 3 )
4General Administration Advisory 24  (Version 1.0, January 2021)                                    Page 1 of 12 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR MODIFIED ASSURED CAREER PROGRESSION SCHEME 
(MACPS) FOR NON -FACULTY STAFF OF THE INSTITUTE  
(As approved by the BoG in its 30th meeting held on 17 December 2020)  
 
 
The Board  of Governors of the Institute in its 30th meeting held on 17 
December 2020  approved  to adopt  the norms of Modified Assured Career 
Progression Scheme (MACPS)  for non-faculty employees of the Institute  as per the 
latest consolidated guidelines provided in DoPT Office Memorandum No. 
35034/3/2015 -Estt.(D) dated 22 October 2019  attached herewith as Annexure -I.  
 General Administration Advisory 24  (Version 1.0, January 2021)                                    Page 2 of 12 Annexure -I 
 
 
General Administration Advisory 24  (Version 1.0, January 2021)                                    Page 3 of 12  
General Administration Advisory 24  (Version 1.0, January 2021)                                    Page 4 of 12  
General Administration Advisory 24  (Version 1.0, January 2021)                                    Page 5 of 12  
General Administration Advisory 24  (Version 1.0, January 2021)                                    Page 6 of 12  
General Administration Advisory 24  (Version 1.0, January 2021)                                    Page 7 of 12  
General Administration Advisory 24  (Version 1.0, January 2021)                                    Page 8 of 12  
General Administration Advisory 24  (Version 1.0, January 2021)                                    Page 9 of 12  
General Administration Advisory 24  (Version 1.0, January 2021)                                    Page 10 of 12  
General Administration Advisory 24  (Version 1.0, January 2021)                                    Page 11 of 12  
 
General Administration Advisory 24  (Version 1.0, January 2021)                                                                                                                                                          Page 12 of 12  
Student Affairs Advisory 0 6 (March  2020)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
STUDENT AFFAIRS  
 
NORMS/PROCEDURE  FOR HANDLING OF ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT  
 
(As approved  by the Senate in its 8th meeting held on 10th September 2011)  
 
The Institute ha s taken several initiatives aimed at instilling in students the right set of values, as 
well as, ethical conduct and practices.  The Institute aims to achieve  for excellence in all facets – 
including adherence to exemplary values and ethical norms.   
 
All reported cases of academic deviance/ copying, and, de parture  from acceptable norms of 
conduct and behavior including non -academic matters  shall be dealt with utmost seriousness  and 
in a fast track mode by Senate Student Affairs Committee  (SSAC) .   
 
The cases of  cheating in the examinations shall  be viewed fa r more seriously than just an award 
of FAIL grade in the concerned course.  However, in dealing with academic misdemeanor, the 
Instructor, at the first instance, could award FAIL grade to the concerned students, and report 
more serious cases (for instance, premeditated cheating) to SSAC for further consideration and 
disciplinary action.  All cases of academic misdemeanor shall be provided by the Instructors in 
writing to the Dean of Academic Affairs and the Dean of Student Affairs for inclusion in the 
student  records .  
 
The Institute expects its Student Leadership to play a crucial role (through peer pressure) in 
educating all students about the ill effects of academic and non -academic misdemeanor on their 
respective futures, as well as on institutional growth , development and reputation.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alumni Relations  Advisory 01 (Version 1.0, December 2021)                                 Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
ASSOCIATE ALUMNI PRO GRAM AT IIT GANDHINA GAR  
(As approved by the BoG in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021)  
 
 
IIT Gandhinagar has been hosting students from other institutions and individuals for 
various programs such as India -ki-Khoj, Summer Research Internship Program, 
Invent@IITGN, and non -degree students. Also, there are  students who could not 
complete academic programs and left the I nstitute after spending considerable time 
without obtaining a degree. During their stay, long or short, these students and 
individuals develop a bonding with the Institute and would want to continue their 
engagement with IITGN. In view of this, the Board o f Governors of the Institute in its 
33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021 approved the following Associate Alumni 
Program framework.  
 
a) Associate Alumni membership is open to individuals who have spent time at 
IITGN for curricular and co -curricular activities/ programs/ initiatives/ courses.  
b) Faculty members of IITGN engaged for long or short duration are also eligible for 
the membership.  
c) The membership application will be recommended by Professor -in-Charge/Dean, 
Alumni Relations and approved by the D irector . 
d) A nominal one -time fee will be applicable for Associate Alumni membership. In 
the first instance, Rs.2,000 /- and this may be revised from time to time by the 
Endowment Management Committee on recommendation of the Professor -in-
Charge/Dean, Alumni Relations.  
e) Associate Alumni Card will be issued to all Associate Alumni Members.  
f) The membership will be marked wit h the program/ activity of IIT Gandhinagar. 
For instance, participants in the activities of Centre for Creative Learning may be 
called “Associate Alumni of CCL, IIT Gandhinagar.”  
g) Associate Alumni membership can be revoked by IIT Gandhinagar at any time 
without providing any reasons to the member. This will, however, require 
approval of the Director.  
 General Administration Adv isory 19 (Version 1.0, August 2018)  Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 
AMOUNT FOR BONDS TO BE EXECUTED FOR AVAILING  
SABBATICAL LEAVE AND STUDY LEAVE  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 2 4th meeting held on 27 July 2018) 
 
 
As per the Section 27.4(e) and Section 28(9) of the Schedule ‘E’ of the First Statutes of 
IIT Gandhinagar, employees of the Institute are required to execute bond before 
proceeding on Sabbatical Leave or Study Leave.  
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute  in its 24th meeting held on 27 July 2018 has 
approved that an employee shall be required to pay to the Institute, a sum equal to the 
salary including allowances drawn by him/her from the Institute during the period of 
such leave together with interest the reon at the rate in force on Government loans, if 
he/she fails to serve the Institute for a period of three years after completion of 
Sabbatical/ Study Leave.  
 Academic Affairs Advisory 41(Version 1. 1, March 201 9) Page 1  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 
GANDHINAGAR  
NORMS FOR ENGAGING PH.D. STUDENTS IN ACADEMIC 
ACTIVITIES  
(as approved by the Senate on 25 September 2014  and amended by the 
Senate in its 32nd meeting ) 
 
The  doctoral  programme   of   the   Institute   places   a   large   emphasis   on   holistic   
development   of   the   students   with   leadership    skills   for   their   future   endeavors.   
Besides the  expectation  of  in -depth  work  in  thesis  work,  the  new  PhD  Curriculum  expects  
the   students   to   attend    seminars,    organize    conferences,    write    research    grant    
proposals  and  participate  in   Institute   activities.   It   is   expected   that   active   participation   
of   the students   in   teaching   and   coordination   of   activities   with   mentorship   of   faculty   
members   of  the  Institute  can  be  useful  in  developing  their  teaching  and  leadership   
skills.   For   example,   teach ing   (lecturing   and/or   tutoring)   a   course   as   an   independent   
instructor   is    a completely  different  experience  than  helping  an  instructor  in  a  course  
as  a  teaching  assistant   or   as   a   grader.   Similarly,   taking   th e   responsibility    of    
coordinating    with    visitors  of  the  institute  can  be  a  significant  learning   experience.   It   
can   be   a   matter   of pride for the student to independently carry out such a responsibility, 
which will help them  build their confidence besides sharpening their people skills and learning 
about work  ethics.  
Currently,   all   Ph.D   students   receiving   Institute   Fellowship    are    expected    to    devote    
eight   hours   per   week   for   assistance   in   teaching   and   other    academic    activities.    
Further,   those   receiving   top -up   fellowships   are    expected   to   devote   four   more    
hours    for  such  activities.  It may be worthwhile  to leverage  this time more  effectively.  
 
It  is  proposed  to  institutionalize   a   few   of   major   activities   of   the   Institute   besides   
teaching  opportunities  which  can  be  offered   to   the   PhD   students   from   time   to   time 
through  a  careful   selection   process.   These   positions   will   have   well -defined   scope   
of   work  and  a  fixed  tenure.  To begin  with  the  following  two  positions  are  proposed  to   
be created with immediate  effect:  
a) Graduate   Teaching  Fellow   (GTF) :   This   position   will   have   tenure   of    six   
months   at  a  time.  The  student  selected  for  this  position  will  have   the   responsibility   
of teaching   a   course   independently   as   an   instructor   or   tutor   of    the   cours e,    
like any other faculty member involved in such a  course.  
b) Graduate   Institute   Fellow   (GIF) :   This   position   will   have   tenure   of    one   
year   or  six  months  which  can   be   renewed   based   on   the   performance.   The   Academic Affairs Advisory 41(Version 1. 1, March 201 9) Page 2  student  selected for this  position  will  have  independent  charge  of  coordinating  a  
set  of  significant  activities  of  the  Institute.   For   example:   to   help   for   arranging   
industry   trips of the UG  and  PG  students,  to  help  developing  industry  relations,  to  
help  coordinate  for  international  internships  of   the   students,   help   in   organizing 
conferences, short courses, summer courses, editorial assistance, assistance in faculty 
recruitment work, help in coordinating with visiting professors, data centre activities,  etc. 
The following norms are applicable regarding these graduate positions:  
1) Number of positions will be approved by the Director based on the recommendation from 
Dean of Academic Affairs. The proposal may come  from various disciplines or 
administrative sections through proper  channel.  
2) A student who has spent at least one year into the programme can apply for such 
positions with consent from the supervisor. The Dean, Academic Affairs may device 
suitable  mechanism  to select candidates for recommending the case to the Director for  
approval.  
3) In case student is an instructor of a course and is delivering independent lectures, a one -
time honorarium at the rate of Rs.5000/ - per credit may be paid on satisfactory conduct  
of the course. The amount may be pro -rated in case the course is shared etc. A few 
occasional lectures by Ph.D students will not qualify for the  honorarium.  
4) Each student in such a position will have a mentor faculty member who will be also 
responsible for  providing sufficient training to the student for efficiently performing the 
assigned  work.  
5) The appointment may be terminated at any time if the academic performance or work 
ethics are found to be below  expectations.  
6) An experience certificate will be issue d to the student by the Dean (Academic  Affairs).  
 
Outstanding Graduate Teaching Fellow Award  
Training in the doctoral programme at IIT Gandhinagar is geared  towards holistic development of 
the Ph.D. students, with the expectation that these students will graduate to become exceptional 
scientists and teachers in the best institutes worldwide. The Graduate Teaching Fellowships 
(GTF) were created at the Institut e with this broader goal in mind, and are meant to act as a 
vehicle to provide Ph.D. students an opportunity to develop and enhance their teaching skills by 
gaining the experience of teaching courses independently as instructors or tutors. This Fellowship 
has been extremely well received, and a number of Ph.D. students have been selected for the 
GTF via a careful and competitive selection process.  Academic Affairs Advisory 41(Version 1. 1, March 201 9) Page 3  Exceptional performance of the Fellows are recognized via “Outstanding Graduate Teaching 
Fellow Award”. It is e nvisioned that such an award will boost the morale of the Ph.D. students, 
and encourage more students to avail the GTF. Typically, one such award is given each semester. 
The awardee gets a grant of up to Rs. 20,000 for travel and professional activities fr om the 
Excellence Fund in the Endowment Ac count.  
 
The required information may be as follows:  
 
1. Nomination Letter:  Any person can nominate the GTF for the award. Self -nominations may 
also be accepted.  This nomination may be a 1 page letter (maximum) and may comment on 
the Fellow’s efforts and dedication towards teaching the course, preparation for the classes, 
clarity of the material presented, ability to engage with the students, etc.  
2. Teaching Stateme nt from Fellow: The Fellow must submit a one page (maximum) letter 
outlining the teaching philosophy he/she adopted in the course, whether and how the 
prescribed goals were met, how he/she benefitted from the experience and what he/she would 
do differently  should a similar opportunity be available in the future.  
 
3.  Student Feedback: Brief statements from at least two students who studied under the Fellow 
in the course. The nominee should not have access to these letters.  
 
4. Course Reaction Survey summary: This may be provided by the Academic office.  
 
Selection and Approval  
A committee comprising of the Dean (Academics), Associate Dean (PG) and at least two other 
faculty members will screen the nominations received. If required, brief interviews with all or a few 
shortlisted nominees may be conducted. This committee will then select one Fellow for the award 
and recommend to the Director for approval.  Academic Affairs Advisory 41(Version 1. 1, March 201 9) Page 4   Academic Affairs Advisory 29 (July 2023)            Page  1 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR NORMS FOR MASTER OF ARTS (MA) IN SOCIETY AND CULTURE (As approved by Board of Governors in its 9th Meeting held on 28th March 2013,  updated in the 24th meeting of the Senate held on 20th July 2016 , 29th meeting of the  Senate held on 11th December 2017, 33rd meeting of the Senate held on 22nd November 2018 and 64th meeting of the Senate held on 10 May 2023)  I. Background   The Humanities and Social Sciences(HSS) group at Indian Institute of Technology,  Gandhinagar (IITGN) offers students in the BTech Programme courses aimed at developing  essential skills in critical thinking and writing along with the knowledge of literature, society,  politics, history, arts and philosophies of the mind and body. It also offers a PhD programme in  HSS disciplines that provides personalized and intensive scholarly mentoring to guide original  research. The HSS faculty team at IITGN, with its diverse expertise, is uniquely equipped to  offer a multidisciplinary Masters Programme with an exceptional potential to attract best  students in the country.  II. Why Masters programme?   § The Masters Programme extends the aims and goals of IITGN to provide a well-rounded,  broad based and excellent education for the benefit of a larger community interested in  both arts and sciences.   § The multidisciplinary profile of faculty at IITGN aims to provide a programme that  interweaves approaches from different disciplines and addresses the gap of  interdisciplinary learning in higher education in India.   § The Programme gives to IITGN faculty and students a platform to disseminate research  ideas and also establish a dialogue with academia/industry/policy makers for  collaborative research.   § Given the strength and skills available in the Humanities and Social Sciences Group at  IITGN, the Programme is in a position to be a leading one in the country.   § The Programme would enable students to pursue a PhD in any of the disciplines s/he  chooses to specialize in, and also be equipped to partake of a range of employment  opportunities (media, NGOs, consultancy, communications industry).   § We envision this to be a broad Humanities and Social Sciences programme that gives  students exposure to the many disciplines that fall under HSS along with  interconnections between them. For instance, a student is able to understand how  Political Science is different from History, in that one looks at structures of governance  and power, while the other has a more temporal emphasis. Having said that, the two disciplines work in tandem and at the end of the course the student should be able to  see that, enabling him/her to make an informed choice about his/her academic focus in  the future.  III. What are the focus areas?   The HSS at IITGN recognizes that an interdisciplinary approach to the study of culture, society  and politics, will ensure intellectual flexibility and rigor in the use of theory and methodology. To establish that, the programme is organized around the following indicative and overlapping  themes:   § Identity and difference  § Knowledge systems  § Systems of power  § Negotiations between arts and ideology  § History and memory  § Development and exclusion  § Global and local systems   Through the rigorous coursework and guided research project, it is expected that students in  the programme will Academic Affairs Advisory 29 (July 2023)            Page  2 be able to develop conceptual tools to critically analyze structural  inequalities relating to gender, sexuality, class, caste, national identity and find ways to address  them more effectively.  IV. Curriculum Structure and other features of the programme   (a) Highly competitive awards will be available to support students in attending  conferences or to participate in summer internships at well recognized organizations/institutes.   (b) A minimum of 80 credits will be needed to successfully complete the programme. This  includes a minimum 56 credits of coursework, and minimum of 20 credits of research project. Masters students in this programme will be required to take 6 out of 10 available Core courses and  the remaining credits will be complemented by a cluster of electives. Students who were admitted before AY 2023-24, are required to complete 4 to 6 core courses as per the list shown for such students in Appendix 1. A hypothetical  roadmap indicating the credit structure and tentative courses has been appended (See  Appendix 2).   (c) The Electives in this programme include at least two courses (8 credits) from disciplines other than HSS (Engineering/Natural Sciences). The goal of this unique provision is to give students an exposure to the  range of disciplines covered by the IITGN faculty community.   (d) Elective courses include those that are either offered by the parent discipline or aligned disciplines in the general area of the programme of study. In some cases  appropriate undergraduate courses could also be offered as electives for the MA  programme. However, electives could also be taken from the entire pool of postgraduate as  well as undergraduate courses offered by any discipline in the institute. In keeping with  the Institute’s philosophy of emphasizing the interdisciplinary approach, students are  required to take at least 8 credits of courses arising from Engineering/Natural Sciences disciplines besides FP 602 – Writing (4 credits).    (e) Students can also take up an Independent Study (eg. Project courses) with any IITGN  faculty member and earn credits towards it. A maximum of 12 credits out of Electives can  be acquired through Independent Study courses.   (f) Over the first two semesters, students are encouraged to start thinking about acquiring  research experience through single or multiple projects and interact with faculty members.  Before registering for research project credits, an adviser will be identified for each  student. Students will be required to submit a research report for assessment purposes  to the concerned faculty/committee on the work performed during the semester. Based on  the report, the committee/concerned faculty will award a letter grade for each discrete unit (4 credits) of research project work.   (g) Research Project - This correlates with approximately six courses. At least 20 credits of research project work will be expected as a requirement for successful  completion of the MA program.  (h) Part of credit fulfillment may take place through a student’s immersion in institutions other  than IITGN. In such cases, equivalent credit transfer will be considered.   (i) Summer research internships/projects on or off campus are required as part  of the Master’s curriculum to help students to complement their research activities, build  networks/professional references and advance their career aspirations.   (j) Completing PG Orientation Programme Aarohan (2 Credits) is a mandatory graduation requirement for all MA students. [Note: The two credits for Aarohan is in addition to the minimum credit requirements of 80 credits required for completing graduation requirements].  § Aarohan is a two-week long programme that all the newly joined students are expected to successfully complete before they commence the first semester in their academic programme. It would Academic Affairs Advisory 29 (July 2023)            Page  3 have 5 themes (Inventing and Discovering, Communication, Professionalism and Ethics, Social Engagement, Well-being).  § In cases where a student fails to clear Aarohan, they must clear an additional two credits worth of HSS courses for graduation (applicable for all students who join from Semester – II, 2022-23 onwards).  (k) Students joining the MA programme (from semester – I, 2021-22 onwards) must complete two Physical Education (PE) courses, one each in their first two semesters, as part of their graduation requirements. These courses will be evaluated on a Pass/No Pass grade basis.   (l) The minimum eligibility criteria for applying to the Master’s programme is as follows:  Bachelor’s degree in any examination (e.g. BA/BSc (Hons), BTech, BE, etc.) with at least 55% marks in aggregate (5.5 CGPA for students with letter grades/CGPA) for  General/OBC category candidates and at least 50% aggregate marks (5.0 CGPA for  students with letter grades/CGPA) for SC, ST and PwD category candidates.   (m) The admission process will include a combination of review of application, an entrance  examination and interviews. However, the faculty will review the effectiveness of  admission process to fine-tune it from time to time.   V. Early Termination  (Applicable for students admitted from AY 2023-24)  § Any student failing to earn a minimum of 28 credits within one year from his/her start of the first year programme (either due to admission or due to restart) should start his/her programme afresh or exit the programme. A student needs to secure a passing grade for earning the credits registered for the course.  § If the programme is restarted, then the credits earned and semesters registered prior to restart will not be carried over.   § Restart will be permitted only once.  § In case the CPI of a student falls below 6.0 out of 10, the fellowship provided, if any, by the Institute will be stopped immediately and for the future.   § There will be no maximum permissible duration to complete the requirements of the programme. However, at any time, credits earned older than eight years will be deemed expired and will not count towards the graduation requirements.  (Applicable for students admitted before AY 2023-24) § Any student failing to earn a minimum of 26 credits at the end of first two registered (active) semesters can either apply to start his/her programme afresh or will have to exit the programme.   § If the programme is restarted, then the credits earned and semesters registered prior to  restart will not be carried over.   § If a student fails to earn 26 credits in the first two semesters but successfully completes  15 or more credits in the second active semester, then only the first semester will be  repeated, i.e., the student will be deemed to have fresh start from the second active semester.   § The restart will be permitted only once.   Academic Affairs Advisory 29 (July 2023)            Page  4 § Upon restart, the student must successfully complete a minimum of 12 credits at the end  of first semester and a minimum of 26 credits at the end of first two semesters, or else  his/her admission will be terminated and no further chance shall be given.   § The maximum period allowed to complete the programme will be three years (the first  year or first semester if repeated will not be counted).   APPENDIX 1: CORE COURSES    (Applicable for students admitted before AY 2023-24)  § Debates in Sociology and Anthropology § Political Thought § Literature, Theory, and Social Context § Critical Approaches in History § Research Methods in Humanities and Social Sciences § Perspectives on Indian Civilization  (Applicable for students admitted from AY 2023-24)  § Critical Perspectives in Anthropology § Critical Perspectives in Sociology § Political Thought  § Literature, Theory, and Social Context  § Perspectives in History  § Perspectives on Indian Civilization  § Developmental Economics § Reading Philosophy: Classical, Contemporary and Global Perspectives § Qualitative Social Science Research Methods § Quantitative Social Science Research Methods   APPENDIX 2: A HYPOTHETICAL ROAD-MAP Credit Structure: The program will follow a structure of 4 semesters and registration during the  summer in between. The minimum number of credits required for the graduation is 80. The  distributions of the credits are given below.   Description Minimum Credits Course Work (Core) 24 Course Work (Electives)	24 Engineering/Natural Science Courses 08 Writing (FP 602) 04 Research Seminar and Research Project  20 Total Credits for Graduation [Excluding credits through Aarohan] 80 Aarohan 02 Physical Education Courses  2 Courses  The following structure is indicative, so as to depict the possible distribution of various credit  components (Core, Electives and Research project) for students admitted from AY 2023-24.  Academic Affairs Advisory 29 (July 2023)            Page  5  Semester Courses Credits I Three Core, Two electives, Physical Education, Aarohan 20 (+2 credits of Aarohan) II FP 602, Three Core, One Research Seminar, Physical Education	20 III Summer Research/Internship (HS 594), Four Electives, Research Proposal 24 IV One elective, Three Research Project OR Four Research Project  16 	Student Affairs Advisory 1 2 (April 2021) Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
STUDENT AFFAIRS  
 
ADVISORY/GUIDELINES ON HOSTEL ACCOMMODATION BOOKING FOR GUESTS  
 
1. The hostel accommodation may be made available to the guests (subject to availability) as  per the 
charges mentioned in the below ta ble (not inclusive of linen/other amenities):  
 
Sl. 
No. 
 Nature of Occupant/Guest  Charges 
per day 
(24hrs)    Charges for longer stay  
A Students who are guests of the Institute / 
working with a   faculty   on   research   
project   for   short duration/JRF/S RF/ 
Post-Doctoral Fellow/Project assistant/ 
any  other  staff  from  Project/Institute 
employee/Intern/Trainee/Start -up staff/ 
External SRIP candidates/On -roll 
students staying beyond period covered 
in semester registration etc.   Rs. 1 75.00 Actual on per d ay basis or Rs.  
4,500/- per month*  (w.e.f.  01 
April 2021) whichever is  lower 
and applicable. For e.g: for a  
continuous stay of 2 7 days 
or above (up to 01 month), the  
occupant may choose to pay @  
monthly charges.  
B Students/persons visiting IITGN for 
academic or employment related 
interview  Rs. 400.00 Actual on per day basis or Rs.  
2,200/per week* whichever is  
lower and applicable. For e.g:  
for a continuous stay of 06 days  
or above (up to 01 week), the  
occupant may choose to pay @  
weekly charges.  C External students visiting IITGN: on 
recommendation of Institute/ to attend 
workshop/conference/or any other 
academic activities  Rs. 400.00 
D Non-student guests/parents/relatives or 
friends to the existing students/alumni 
/all others  Rs. 400.00 
E Intern ational students/visitors  Rs. 600.00  Actual on per day basis or                
Rs. 3,300/per week* whichever is  
lower and applicable. For e.g:  
for a continuous stay of 06 days  
or above (up to 01 week), the  
occupant may choose to pay @  
weekly charges.  
➢ *The accommodation charges for longer stays shall be calculated in the multiple(s) of 
months/weeks, as applicable under the respective category.  
➢ For any additional days beyond the multiples of a month (In case of Sl  No. A above) or a 
week (In case of Sl No. B,  C, D & E above), the payment would be levied according to the 
per day charges as applicable under the respective category.  
 
2. A prior approval is needed from the Warden, Student Welfare through the General Secretary / 
Student Welfare Secretary for a visitor’s overnight stay. The link to the hostel accommodation 
request form is available at IWS (Internal Website) under the heading Forms  > Student 
Affairs.  
 Student Affairs Advisory 1 2 (April 2021) Page 2 
 3. Subsequent to the approval granted the host would receive a boo king confirmation email from 
the Student Affairs Office. This email has all the necessary information related to the room -
booking including details of contact person, payment terms, etc.  
 
4. All hostel visitors are required to enter their credentials in the r egisters kept at the security 
desk of the corresponding hostel. A valid identity card has to be produced by each visitor for 
verification.  
5. The guest accommodation in hostels will be provided on a “first -come, first -served basis”and 
is subject to availabili ty. Priority will be given to Institute related activities (conferences, 
seminars, academic programs, interviews, etc.) and urgent medical issues.  
 
6. Due to non -availability of the hostel accommodation, in case the host student wishes to 
accommodate their gu est(s) in their own room/friend’s room, the regular accommodation 
charges, as mentioned above shall be applicable.  
 
7. All visitors of hostels shall adhere to the hostel norms and the Institute Honor Code.  
 
8. Visitors residing at the hostels may avail the mess facility at applicable walk -in rates.  
 
9. In case the student wishes to avail the Institute Guest House facility, booking form for the 
same alongwith the necessary instructions is available at IWS (Internal Website) under the 
heading Forms  >Hospitality.  
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 13 (March 2020)  Page 1 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
STUDENT AFFAIRS  
 
TERMS FOR SETTING UP OF UNDERGRADUATE SCHOLARSHIP(S)  
 
Preamble:   
Currently, the UG tuition and other fees work out to about Rs 2,50,000/- per year. In addition, 
students need about Rs 50,000/- per year to cover mess, books and other expenses. Thus, the 
total cost of education at IIT Gandhinagar works out to about Rs 3,00,000 /- per year.   
In view of the above costs, we recommend a minimum value of scholarship to be Rs 2,000 per 
month for 10 months in a year, and in multiples thereof, that is, Rs 4,000 per month (Rs 40,000 
per year), Rs 6,000 per month (Rs 60,000 per year), etc.   
Amount:   
An endowment of twenty times the annual expenditure is considered appropriate. With the 
current rates of interest  prevalent in the country, endowment may earn 8% - 9% interest per year. 
Thus, about 5% of the endowment value will go towards paying the scholarship and the balance 
of the interest earned will be added to the endowment to cover for inflation.   
A UG schola rship of Rs. 2,000/ - per month (for ten months in a year) would require an 
endowment of Rs. 4.0 lakhs (US$ 10,000) which may be donated in one or two installments. 
Donors may set -up an endowment for a scholarship of Rs. 1,000/ - per month (for ten months) 
and then upgrade the amount with time to make the value of scholarship @ Rs. 2,000/ - per 
month.   
Scholarship Options:    
The scholarship may be based on merit -cum-means or purely on merit.    
It is preferred that the scholarship be open to all students. How ever,   
o The donor may specify that the eligible students should come from a specific 
department.   
o The donor may also specify if the scholarship is meant for student(s) of a 
particular year.   
o The donor may wish that the scholarship is meant for a female stud ent.  
General:    
The Scholarships will be named after either the donor or any other person that the donor 
may decide.    
IITGN will every year inform the donor about the status of the scholarship including the 
name of the recipient students.    
IITGN will  keep separate ledger page for each such donation. The excess interest earned 
(after deducting the scholarship amount) will be added to the corpus and will be used to 
cover drop in interest rates, inflation, and growth.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 13 (March 2020)  Page 2 
 
Indian Institute of Techn ology Gandhinagar  
SCHOLARSHIP FORM  
 
1. Name:____________________________________________________________  
 
2. Address:__________________________________________________________  
___________________________________________________________  
 
E-mail: _________________  Telephone No. _____________________________  
 
3. Affiliations:________________________________________________________  
 
4. In case of Alumni if any IIT:  
 
IIT ____________________Degree______________Branch _________________  
 
Year of graduation _________________  
 
5. Type of Scholarship:  
UG: (i)___________________________________________________________  
(ii) ___________________________________________________________  
(iii) ___________________________________________________________  
 
PG: (i)________________________________________ ___________________  
(ii) ___________________________________________________________  
(iii) ___________________________________________________________  
 
6. Rate of Scholarship:_________________________________________________  
 
7. Endowment Amount:___________________________ _____________________  
 
Cheque should be payable to “IIT Gandhinagar Endowment Fund”  and mailed to:  
 
Professor Sudhir K Jain  
Director  
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar  
Palaj, Gandhinagar – 382 355 
 
Phone : +91 -79-2397 2622   
Fax: +91 -512-2397 2622  
email: director@iitgn.ac.in  
Web: www.iitgn.ac.in  
 
All donations are 100% exempt under section 80G of Indian Income Tax.  
 
 
Date____ ______________  Signatures ____________________   
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 02  (B) (March 2020 ) Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
STUDENT AFFAIRS  
 
EXCELLENCE SCHOLARSHIPS AT IITGN  
 
 
Scholarship for Academic Excellence  
 
 With an aim to reward academic excellence, each of the UG students who secure the 
highest CPI in their respective disciplin es is awarded the Academic Excellance 
Scholarship.  
 
Scholarship for Excellence in Sports and Games  
 
 To encourage excellence in sports and games, a total of six scholarships are awarded 
every year. Students in second, third and fourth year of UG programme  are eligible for 
the award of the Scholarship for Excellence in Sports and Games.   
 
Scholarship for Excellence in Arts & Culture  
 
 With an objective towards promoting excellence in arts and cultural activities,  a total 
of two scholarships are awarded every  year. Students in second, third and fourth year 
of UG programme  are eligible for the award of the Scholarship for Excellence in Arts 
and Culture.   
 
Scholarship for Excellence in Social Work and Leadership  
 
 Two scholarships have been instituted to encourag e students who demonstrate 
outstanding leadership skills and social outreach initiatives. Students in second, third 
and fourth year of UG programme  are eligible for the award of the Scholarship for 
Excellence in Social Work and Leadership.  
 
Amount of Scho larship:  
 
Each recipient of Excellence Scholarships is awarded ₹ 2,000/- per months for ten months. 
However, if the awardee is also a recipient of any scholarship of equal or higher value, then 
he/she is eligible only for a one -time receipt of ₹ 5 ,000/- for any excellence scholarship . 
 
 
Application and Process of Sele ction:  
 
On behalf of Senate Scholarships and Prizes Committee (SSPC), Student Affairs office 
invite s applications from the UG students for the Excellence Scholarships except Scholarship 
for Academic Excellence  (based on CPI) . The Scholarships are approved by the Director on 
recommendations of Senate Scholarships and Prizes Committee ( SSPC ).     
 Academic Affairs Advisory 61 (Version 2.0, October 2023)                                                   Page 1 of 2  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  CONTINUOUS EVALUATION AND TIMELY FEEDBACK TO STUDENTS  (As approved by Senate in its 61st meeting held on 15 November 2022, 62nd meeting held on 27 December 2022 and in its 66th meeting held on 16 October 2023)  A. EXAMINATION MODEL  The Institute expects continuous evaluation in all courses. The following examination model has been adopted by the Institute.   Applicable from Semester II, 2023-24  1. Examination I: An examination of up to 2.5 hours duration, usually conducted after half of the semester duration is completed. The examination may be held over 7 days including a Saturday and a Sunday.   2. Examination II: An examination of up to 2.5 hours duration, usually conducted towards the end of the semester. The examination may be held over 7 days including a Saturday and a Sunday.   3. Course instructors are free to decide whether or not to conduct Examination I and/or Examination II.  Applicable for Semester II, 2022-23, Summer Term 2022-23 and Semester I, 2023-24  1. Examination-I: An examination of 1.5 hour duration, usually conducted after one third of the total semester duration is completed.   2. Examination-II: An examination of 1.5 hour duration, usually conducted after two thirds of the total semester duration is completed.   3. Examination-III: An examination of 1.5 hour duration, usually conducted towards the end of the semester.   4. Course instructors will be free to decide whether or not to conduct any or all of the above mentioned examinations, ensuring continuous evaluation in all courses including lab courses.   B. TIMELINE FOR ASSESSMENT AND FEEDBACK  Further, for ensuring continuous evaluation and timely feedback to students in all courses including lab courses and project courses, the Senate approved the following timeline for assessment and feedback in all full semester courses.   Applicable from Semester II, 2023-24  1. Showing of corrected answer scripts of Examinations (I/II) to the students (if applicable): Within 72 hours from the end of the Examination (I/II) for the course.  2. Feedback to students on all assessments carried out prior to an Examination (I/II) (applicable for all courses including courses in which Examination I/II is not conducted): Within 72 hours from the last day of the Examination (I/II).  3. Feedback to SAPEC on performance of students (applicable for all courses including courses in which Examination I is not conducted): Within 96 hours from the last day of Examination I.  Academic Affairs Advisory 61 (Version 2.0, October 2023)                                                   Page 2 of 2  4. Grade submission: Within 96 hours from the end of Examination II (if applicable) for the course or within 96 hours from the last day of Examination II, whichever is earlier.  Applicable for Semester II, 2022-23, Summer Term 2022-23 and Semester I, 2023-24  1. Showing of corrected answer scripts of Examinations (I/II/III) to the students (if applicable): Within 72 hours from the end of the Examination (I/II/III) for the course.  2. Feedback to students on all assessments carried out prior to an Examination (I/II/III) (applicable for all courses including courses in which Examination I/II/III is not conducted): Within 72 hours from the last day of the Examination (I/II/III).  3. Feedback to SAPEC on performance of students (applicable for all courses including courses in which Examination I/II is not conducted): Within 96 hours from the last day of Examination (I/II).  4. Grade submission: Within 96 hours from the end of Examination III (if applicable) for the course or within 96 hours from the last day of Examination III, whichever is earlier.  C. EVALUATION POLICY  Applicable from Semester II, 2023-24  1. The maximum permissible weightage for Examination I/Examination II will be 40% each.  2. 40-50% of the total assessment of a full semester course must be done through activities by the last scheduled date of Examination I, whether Examination I is conducted or not.    3. 100% of the total assessment of a full semester course must be done through activities by the last scheduled date of Examination II, whether Examination II is conducted or not.   4. At least one examination is recommended to be conducted for half semester courses (either Examination I or Examination II) and 100% of the assessment must be done through activities by that Examination schedule.  Applicable for Semester II, 2022-23, Summer Term 2022-23 and Semester I, 2023-24  1. The maximum permissible weightage for Examination I/Examination II/Examination III will be 30% each.  2. 25-40% of the total assessment must be done up to and including Examination I, even if Examination I is not conducted for a course.    3. Similarly, 50-80% of the total assessment should be done up to and including Examination II even if Examination II is not conducted for a course.   4. 100% of the total assessment is to be completed up to and including Examination III, even if Examination III is not conducted.   5. At least one examination is recommended to be conducted for half semester courses (either Examination I or Examination III) and the weightage of this examination should be in the range of 30-50%. Instructors may also take another exam in the slot earmarked of Examination II.  
 
Organizing events at IIT Gandhinagar 
By organizing an event at the IITGN campus, I agree to the following: 
 
Community considerations 
  The event will not disrupt general functioning of the campus 
  Noise levels will remain low 
  There will be no permanent effect on surroundings (e.g. trees) 
  Signage will not be put on walls; poster boards will be used 
  Parking spaces will be clearly identified 
Food and catering 
  Only biodegradable or washable plates, spoons and glasses will be used 
  Use of tissue papers will be avoided (use reusable cloth napkins or hand wash provision) 
  Styrofoam and plastic based products will not be used for serving or packing food 
  Disposable plastic water bottles will not be used 
Collection and disposal of waste 
  Any waste generated during the event will be properly segregated 
  Food waste will go to the composting unit/biogas plant 
  Recyclable items will be transported to dry waste storage 
  Landfill waste will be minimized 
  Waste collection bins will be installed to meet the demand 
Safety 
  Electrical connections will be properly done with all safety measures. 
  Tents (if any) will be properly erected in a safe manner considering weather conditions. 
  Exit paths will be clearly demarcated. 
 Inform security and Dean Campus Development.  
  
 Students Affairs Advisory 16 (Version 1.0, December 2021)                                   Page 1 of 1 
 
 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAG AR 
 
MEDICAL  FACILITIES  TO STUDENTS  OF IIT GANDHINAGAR  
(As approved by the BOG in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021)  
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021 
approved the following norms for medical facilities for the students of the Institute with 
effect from 01 January 2022:  
 
(a) Outpatient Treatment (OPD):  
i) All the registered students, including part -time and non -degree students, and 
their dependents ( defined as spouse and minor children only)  if any, will be 
entitled for free consultation and available medicines from the IITGN Medical 
Centre.  
ii) Expenditure  incurred on specialist consultation, pathology/ radiology tests, 
medicines purchased from the market, etc. when the student is registered and 
staying on campus or coming to campus as a day scholar (e.g., full -time PhD 
students living off -campus) will be r eimbursed provided that such 
consultations/ tests are undertaken on recommendations of an IITGN Medical 
Consultant. Expenditures of dependents (as defined above) on such matters 
will also be reimbursed, but only if the dependents are staying with the stude nt 
and the consultations/ tests are undertaken on recommendations of the IITGN 
Medical Consultant. In either case, the cost of cosmetic surgeries, cost of 
spectacles or hearing aids, and treatment of infertility will not be reimbursed.  
iii) The above expen diture will not be reimbursed when the student is away from 
the campus (viz. semester drop, visiting home, on leave, etc.). However, if the 
student is away from campus “on duty” (viz. domestic internship, field trips, 
etc.), reimbursement may be considered  on a case -by-case basis.  
iv) The reimbursement of expenditure on dental and eye treatments will be 
capped at 1.75 times the rates prescribed by CGHS. In case CGHS rates are 
not available, AIIMS (New Delhi) rates will apply in place of CGHS rates.   
v) Part-time students and their dependents if any, will not be eligible for 
reimbursement of expenditure mentioned above in points ii, iii and iv.  
 
(b) Inpatient Treatment (IPD):  
i) All registered full -time students and their dependents (spouse and minor 
children) if any will be covered under Medical Group Insurance Scheme and 
they may avail IPD services from the list of hospitals as per the insurance 
plan, the coverage limit of which may be refined from time to time (currently 
Rs. 1.50 lakhs).  
ii) In case th e expenditure exceeds the insurance limit or the insurance company 
disallows certain expenditure on IPD, those expenditures are to be borne by 
the student.  
iii) In case of financial hardship, a student may request the Institute for additional 
support. Such  requests will be considered on a case -by-case basis and may 
be in the form of interest free loan (to be repaid before or after graduation) or 
a grant.  General Administration Advisory 21 (Version 2.0, June  202 2) Page 1 of 5 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAG AR 
 
BOOKING OF AIR TICKETS FOR OFFICIAL TRIPS  
 
 
1. Subsequent to the disinvestment of Air India, the Government of India has issued 
guidelines/ instructions at various points of time regarding booking of air tickets. 
The latest Office Memorandum of the Government in this regard is attached 
herewith.  
 
2. Accordingly, all are advised for strict compliance of these guidelines/ instructions 
where the Institute/ Government bears the cost of travel. Some of the major 
points are iterated in subsequent paras for ready reference and attention.  
 
3. Air tickets for official tour and LTC shall be purchased only from the following 
three Authorized Travel Agents:  
(i) M/s Balmer Lawrie & Company Limited (BLCL)  
(ii) M/s. Ashok Travel & Tours (ATT)  
(iii) Indian Railways Catering and Tourism Corporation Ltd. (I RCTC)  
 
4. The Institute has made special arrangements with M/s. Balmer Lawrie & 
Company Limited (BLCL) to utilize their services for booking of air tickets. 
Registration process for the agency is described at the end of this Order.  
 
5. Employees are encouraged to make their own ticket booking digitally through 
self-booking tool/ portal of these three authorised agencies only.  
 
6. Ticket booking for the guests of the Institute (domestic as well as foreign) is to be 
done by the Institute through BLCL and the followin g personnel have been 
authorised in this regard to coordinate with BLCL.  
 
Sr. 
No. Department/ Sections  Name of Employees  
i Director Office  Mr. Santosh Raut  / Ms. Komal  Sangtani  
ii Registrar Office  Mr. Tenils Solanki  / Ms. Lakshmipriya V.  
iii Faculty Coordination Office  Ms. Sunita Menon  / Ms. Rupali Salve  
iv Hospitality Section  Mr. Jithesh V.K.  / Mr. Yashwant Chauhan  
v IWD Mr. Piyush Vankar  
 
7. No agency charges/ convenience fees will be paid to the ticket booking agency.  
 
8. Employees are to choose flight having the Best Available Fare on their  entitled 
travel class which is the cheapest fare available, preferably for non -stop flight.  
 
9. Employees are encouraged to book flight tickets at least 21 days prior to the 
intended date of travel on tour and LTC, to avail the most competitive fares and 
minimise the expenditure.  
 General Administration Advisory 21 (Version 2.0, June  202 2) Page 2 of 5 10. Any booking made within less than 72 hours of intended travel on Tour, will 
require the submission of self -declared justification by the employee.  
 
11. This is in supersession of all existing orders / communications in this regard.  
 
12. Registration process  for BLCL is as under : 
Step-1: Login to www. balmerlawrie.com  and select the page T ravel & Vacations . 
Step-2: Go to ‘Click to Book Tab’. 
Step-3: The portal will ask for login details , where you will have to click on ‘First time 
user’ option and register your name by giving your IITGN Email Id , four dig it 
Employee Id in the column Office -Id and choose the Category as Govt. 
Employee . 
Step-4: Once registered, you may boo k the tickets at your own after making the 
payments . 
Step-5: You can add the details of your dependent family members by clicking ‘Edit 
Profile Details’.  
 
 
 
  General Administration Advisory 21 (Version 2.0, June  202 2) Page 3 of 5 
 General Administration Advisory 21 (Version 2.0, June  202 2) Page 4 of 5 
 General Administration Advisory 21 (Version 2.0, June  202 2) Page 5 of 5 
 
 Faculty Affairs Advisory  18 (version 2.0, June 202 1) Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
Expectations from IIT Gandhinagar  faculty for  
appointment as Associate Professors  
 
Advancement in rank is a means to recognize and promote excellent scholarship by our 
colleagues. In this document, expectations from IIT Gandhinagar faculty for appointment as 
Associate Professors are outlined. The intent is to convey the high expectations  the institute 
places on its faculty members while maintaining the flexibility needed to accommodate the 
diversity of disciplines in the institute.  
 
To seek appointment at A ssociate Professor position, a faculty member  at IIT Gandhinagar  will 
be expected to satisfy all of the criteria listed below:  
 
1. Independent research capabilities  
 
a. S/he must have demonstrated a sustained publication record in reputed journals 
based on work done at IIT Gandhinagar . Within this, it is important to have at least 
some public ations that do not include one’s mentor (e.g., PhD or post -doc guide) as 
a co-author. Similarly, it is important to have at least some publications that are not 
co-authored with a large research team outside IIT Gandhinagar (nationally or 
internationally).  For disciplines in which other  forms of publications  (for example, 
conference publications  in case of Computer Science ) are significantly valued, 
publications at the best venues are expected.  
 
b. In case of collaborative research, the individual research contributions should be 
clearly outlined. These individual contributions will be appropriately factored in during 
the assessment.  
 
c. S/he must be active in guiding research students at PhD level, and possibly at 
BTech/ MTech/MSc/MA levels, as the case may be.  At least one PhD student should 
have completed  his/her PhD under the faculty member’s guidance  (or nearing 
completion) with additional students in the pipeline. Further, s/he must have 
successfully helped these student(s) publish their work (papers accept ed for 
publications can be counted towards this).  
 
d. S/he must have been successful in bringing reasonable amounts of research funding 
from external agencies as principal investigator. In exceptional cases, if the 
candidate can demonstrate that his/her resea rch requires no experimental or 
computational resources or field -work that needs funds, this condition may be 
waived.   
 
e. In case of experimentalists, s/ he should have developed appropriate research 
facilities at IIT Gandhinagar .  
 
f. The faculty member’s track record should indicate likelihood of continuing to remain 
a productive researcher over the longer term.  
 Faculty Affairs Advisory  18 (version 2.0, June 202 1) Page 2 
 g. The research evaluation will be carried out in the context of intellectual quality and 
broad impact (or potential impact). It is noted that the number of publications are 
secondary to the impact that they have on his/her field. Similarly, peer recognition for 
research will be valued. It is also recognized that given the diversity of the faculty 
and their specific areas of work , this criterion will have to be interpreted in that 
context.  
 
h. The faculty  member is  expected to have a clear vision and focus in his/her research 
that is expected to make an impact in the years ahead.  
 
2. Teaching capabilities and commitment  
 
a. S/he should have successfully taught a range of courses, both at UG and PG levels, 
with decent student feedback ratings. This should include at least 2 core/basic/large 
courses. However, this may be relaxed somewhat for colleagues working in highly 
interdisciplinary a reas or areas not prevalent in IITGN’s degree programs.  
 
b. Innovations in teaching, developing teaching materials, and teaching laboratories will 
be particularly appreciated.  
 
c. Engagement with students in curricular, co -curricular and extracurricular activit ies is 
generally expected. Since teaching is not an activity restricted to the classroom 
alone, advising and interactions with the student s outside of class are also 
recognized as important aspects of teaching excellence.  
 
3. Commitment to service  
 
a. S/he shoul d have made direct, positive contribution to some Institution building 
activities and outreach.  
 
b. Exceptional leadership in service to the Institute provided by a faculty member would 
be appropriately factored in assessment of research contributions.  
 
In addition to the above expectations, the faculty member is expected to have maintained the 
highest levels of ethical standards  and their conduct with students /staff/faculty  must have been 
impeccable.  
 
As the Institute grows, these expectations will go higher.  
 
 
 
 
 Academic Affairs Advisory (Version 1. 1, July 2021)                                                     Page 1 of 3 
  
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR WORK AND STUDY M.TECH. PROGRAMME  
 
(As approved by the BoG in its 30th meeting held on 17 December 2020  and 
updated in the 49 th meeting of the Senate held on 22 nd February 2021 ) 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 30th meeting held on 17 December 2020 
in-princip le approved to have a provision of Work and Study M.Tech. programme  to 
create a specialized workforce for major facilities/laboratories and research projects 
within the Institute. The M.Tech . graduation requirements will remain unchanged in 
this programme, but the enrolled students can complete it over a period of 3 years  (or 
more) while working for 20 hours per week within the Institute.  
 
The students admitted under the Work and Study M.Tech. programme can complete 
their coursework and the sis requirements at a relatively slower pace while working in 
the Institute. The normal time for graduation for these students will be 3 years, and the 
maximum period of graduation will be 5 years. Their tuition fees will be the same as 
for the regular ful l-time MTech students with Institute fellowship. These students will 
receive an assistantship of 18,000/ - per month to serve 20 hours per week in their host 
Facility/Laboratory/Project for the entire duration of their programme. The 
assistantship provided to a student may be extended beyond 36 months, subject to 
the performance and established need in the host facility/laboratory. Faculty members 
can also recruit these students on sponsored research projects where a long 
association of students with the res earch project can bring immense benefit to both 
faculty and student . The host facility or faculty members can also provide  an additional 
assistantship amount from their project funds or other available funding sources to 
attract and retain the best talent.   
 
1. Scope and Principle  
 
(i) All candidates enrolled in the Work and Study M.Tech. program would be 
associated with a major facility in the Institute  such as Central 
Instrumentation Facility (CIF), Computer Center (CC), Informational 
Systems and Technology Facility (ISTF), Institute Management System 
(IMS), laboratories and research projects, wherein they would be expected 
to work for 20 hours per week . Faculty members may also recruit these 
students on sponsored research projects where a longer association of 
students with the research project can bring immense benefit to both faculty 
and student.  
(ii) While working in the Institute, the candidates would be  concurrently 
completing the thesis and coursework requirements expected for an 
M.Tech. degree, but at a relatively slower pace, as explained in the following 
sections.  Academic Affairs Advisory (Version 1. 1, July 2021)                                                     Page 2 of 3 
 (iii) This program is expected to facilitate recruitment of talented individuals for 
handlin g sophisticated equipment and managing high -end research 
facilities. The hands -on experience that the candidates would earn through 
this program is expected to provide them a rich skill set, which would make 
them well prepared for a successful career.   
 
2. Admission  
 
(i) The number of positions available in the Work and Study M.Tech. program 
will be compiled by the R&D office every academic year and shared with the 
disciplines prior to the admission process.  
(ii) While applying for admissions in this programme, the ca ndidates would be 
required to select a discipline in the same manner as they do for a regular 
M.Tech. program.  
(iii) The minimum eligibility criteria for admission to this programme be the  
same as that for the regular M.Tech. program . The discipline, however, may 
use additional criteria to shortlist the best candidates, which may be different 
from that for regular M.Tech. program.  
(iv) The shortlisted candidates would appear for written test/interview conducted 
by the disciplines. The disc iplines will recommend the candidates to Dean 
R&D for final selection.  
(v) The offer letter for admission to this program would be sent from the R&D 
office indicating the requirements of the programme in terms of work 
expectations. This would be supplemented b y a letter from the academic 
office explaining the academic requirements for earning M.Tech. degree 
through this program.  
(vi) For recent graduates, a valid GATE score may be considered as a criteria 
for shortlisting. However, the candidates with significant in dustrial 
experience or with evidence of excellent academic record  be granted 
exemption.   
(vii) The final selection of the candidates will be based on their performance in 
the written test and/or interview.  
 
3. Educational plan  
 
(i) The students enrolled in the Work and Study M.Tech. program me are 
expected to earn minimum 80 credits as per the graduation requirements of 
the regular M.Tech. programme. However, they will be completing these 
requirements at a relatively slower pace. The normal duration of program 
for these students would be three years. The maximum duration for 
completing the program, however, will be five years.  
(ii) The students enrolled in this program would be allowed to register for a 
maximum of 12 credits in a regular se mester and a maximum of 8 credits 
during summer term, including credits earned through online courses.  
(iii) The students are expected to register for a minimum of 8 credits in a regular 
semester and a minimum of 4 credits during the summer term.  
 Academic Affairs Advisory (Version 1. 1, July 2021)                                                     Page 3 of 3 
 4. Financial Suppo rt 
 
(i) The R&D office will assign the selected candidates to the host facility, where 
the student is expected to work 20 hours every week, for receiving their 
assistantship.  
(ii) IITGN will provide an assistantship of Rs  18,000/ - per month to the students 
enrolled in this program.  
(iii) The tuition fee per semester for students admitted in this program would be 
the same as that paid by the regular M.Tech. students with Institute 
fellowship.  
(iv) This assistantsh ip would be provided  for a period of 36 months, subject to 
a satisfactory work and academic performance, as explained in the following 
section.  
(v) The assistantship provided to a student may be extended beyond 36 
months, subject to the satisfactory performance, availability of funds, and 
established need in the host facility/laboratory.  
(vi) The host facility or faculty members can also provide an additional 
assistantship amount from their project funds or other available funding 
sources to attract and retain the best talent.  
 
5.  Asse ssment  
 
(i) The students admitted in this program would be allotted  two advisors – Work 
Advisor for work related matters, and Faculty Advisor for thesis and 
coursework related matters. It is possible that in some cases the same 
faculty member can serve both the advisory roles.  
(ii) A monthly progress report will be sent by the  work advisor to the R&D office 
for release of fellowship. The students enrolled in this programme would be 
submitting a time card at the end of every month detailing the work carried 
out.  The work advisor will rate the progress as Above Expectations/As P er 
Expectations/Below Expectations every month.  
(iii) For continuing in the programme, the students are expected  to satisfy both 
the work as well as the academic expectations. In case a student 
consistently accumulates ‘Below Expectations’ ratings from the work 
advisor, or if the CPI of the student falls below 5.0, at any point of time from 
second semester onwards, he/she will be liable to be terminated from the 
academic programme.  
(iv) Conversion of Work and Study programme to regular M.Tech programme is 
not permitted. However, students may be permitted to convert their 
programmes to PGDIIT contingent upon the Institute approval.  
(v) The students will have a maximum of five years to obtain the degree.  
 
 Academic Affairs Advisory 34 (Version 1.0, January 2015)                                                       Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR INDUSTRY VISITS OF THE STUDENTS  
 
(As approved by the Senate  in its 1 8th meeting held on 25th September 2014 ) 
 
Exposure to industry plays an important role in professional education of the students. Such  Industry 
visits also help the Institute to build long -term relationships with those industries, which can be helpful 
in creating research opportunities and placement of the students. The Institute recognizes the 
importance of industry visits of the studen ts. Some of instructors in various courses have been 
organizing such industry visits from time to time. The feedback from such visits has been 
encouraging. However, these visits  are only a few and dependent on the interest of individual 
instructors in only  a few courses, i t is expected to encourage industry visits of the students on a 
regular basis.  
1. Each of the undergraduate and masters students of the Institute is expected to visit at least 
TWO industries in each semester. The Ph.D students and faculty/sta ff will be welcome to join 
such visits. The word industry in the current context will be interpreted in the most liberal 
sense and will include site visits, visits to NGO ’s and slums, R&D Labs etc.  
2. These visits are likely to be in vicinity of Ahmedabad. Th e Institute will provide reasonable 
travel support for such visits on case to case basis. The organizing team will seek budget 
approval through Dean, Academic Affairs.  
3. It is expected that Career Development Service (CDS) and the Academic Coordinators of 
various disciplines will work together to arrange for these visits. In addition to the visits 
arranged by the instructors of various courses, senior Doctoral students and Post -doctoral 
research scholars will be also encouraged to coordinate such visits for t he students. It is 
expected that a team of UG and PG students will have active role in organizing these visits.  
4. The CDS will compile the data on the students who participated in each visit. This information 
may be useful in evaluation of engagement of indi vidual students.  
 
 
Enclosures:   
1. Form for Approval of support for Industrial Trip and undertake the journey  
2. Form for Payment Regarding Industrial Trip  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Academic Affairs Advisory 34 (Version 1.0, January 2015)                                                       Page 2 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR   
Form for Approval of support for Indu strial Trip and undertake the journey  
  
S. 
No. Content  Details  
1. Detail of places/organizations to 
visit  
2. Estimated Travel distance in 
round  trip  
3. Expected Number of Students to 
go on trip   
4. Name(s) of the Faculty/Staff 
Members accompanying   
5. Date of Commencement   
6. Likely date of Return   
7. Mode of Travel  Rail:                 Road:               Others:  
8. Approximate Transportation Cost   
9. Other expenses (accommodation, 
D.A. etc. for faculty/staff)   
10. Total expected expenditure   
· The undersigned and accompanying staff members have informed their section in -charge(s) 
about this visit and have their consent.  
· This visit will not create disruption to other academic activities.  
Signature of the accompanying 
Faculty/Staff member   
Any other relevant information:  
  
Recommended by  
Dean, Academic Affairs   
 
   
Appro val 
 
 
 
Professor -in-charge ( GA)/DirectorAcad emic Affairs Advisory 34 (Version 1.0, January 201 5)                                                             Page 3 
 
 INDIAN  INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY  GANDHINAGAR  
Form for Payment Regarding  Industrial  Trip 
 
 
S. Content Details 
 
1. 
  
Places/Orga nizations visited  
  
 
2.  
Numb er of students on the trip  
 
3.  
Date  and Time of departure  
  
 
4. 
  
Date  of Time of Return 
  
 
5. 
  
Mode  of Travel 
  
  Rail:                  Road:                      Ot hers: 
  
6. 
  
Transportation  Charges  
  
 
7. 
  
Accommo dation  Charge  (If Approved) 
  
8. 
 DA Claim  For: 
 
 Name 
 Designation 
    Food Expenses / 
Charges  8.1 
    
8.2 
    
8.3 
    
8.4 
    
8.5 
    
 
                                                           Total=
  
 
I am claiming the entire amount which wi ll be disbursed as above.  
(Approval for the trip is attached)  
 
 
Name & Si gnature of Claimant 
                                                          Date:  
Verified that the above claim is admissible.  
 
 
 
Assistant Registrar (F & A) 
  
Appro val 
 
 
Professor -in-charge (GA)  Faculty Affairs Advisory 35 (Version 1.0, February  2023 )                                       Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAG AR 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF ANU AND B V JAGADEES H CHAIR   
(As approved by the BoG in its 36th meeting held on 17 December 2022) 
 
 
In pursuance of the MoU signed between the Shri B V Jagadeesh and Smt. Anuradha 
Jagadeesh of CA, USA, IIT Gandhinagar Foundation  (IITGNF)  and IITGN, the Board of 
Governors of the Institute in its 36th meeting held on 17 December 2022 approved to 
establish ‘Anu and B V Jagadeesh Chair ’ with the terms and procedure for appointment to 
the Chair as provided below.  
 
IITGN shall use the endowment created by Shri B V Jagadeesh and Smt. Anuradha 
Jagadeesh of CA, USA  to support a Chair at IITGN named the ‘Anu and B V Jagadeesh 
Chair ’ with the primary mandate to promote excellence in innovation  and entrepreneurship 
development. This may include:  
 
(a) organizing long -term as well as short -term courses in innovation and entrepreneurship  
(b) inviting eminent entrepreneurs and innovators to IITGN for seminars and workshops  
(c) conducting entrepreneurship -related events  
(d) supporting exposure visits (domestic and international) for IITGN students who 
demonstrate entrepreneurship potential  
(e) other entrepreneurship and innovation related activities  
 
IITGN shall provide to the Donors an annual  report specifying:  
 
(a) academic activities undertaken under the aegis of this Chair.  
(b) broader status of entrepreneurship development at IITGN including initiatives taken  to 
scout for good ideas and innova tions, number of entrepreneurs supported directly or 
indirectly, number of startups incubated, external funding received, etc.  
(c) the income, expenses and period ending balance of the Endowment.  Academic Affairs Advisory 35 (Version 2.0, March 2024)                                                             Page 1  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  DEFINITION OF STATUS FOR STUDENTS IN THE DOCTORAL PROGRAMME  AND NORMS FOR CONTINUING DOCTORAL PROGRAMME (CDP)  (As approved by the Senate in its 18th meeting held on 25th September 2014 and  updated in its 68th meeting held on 27th February 2024)   PhD student status shall be defined across three non-academic dimensions as defined below:  1. Financial Sponsorship   PhD students admitted to IITGN can be financially sponsored wholly by the Institute, in form of fellowship admissible as per MoE guidelines. All other students will be considered to be on non-Institute financial sponsorship, which also includes self-sponsorship. The financial sponsorship status of the student who gets a top-up fellowship in addition to full fellowship through MoE funds shall be treated as Institute. Similarly, financial sponsorship status of the student who gets partial fellowship (less than 25% of full fellowship amount) from MoE funds shall be treated as non-Institute. Other supports such as project fellowship, financially self-sponsored, state government or private fellowships shall also be treated as non-Institute.  2. Nature of Participation  PhD students may participate in their PhD programme either in the Full-Time mode or in the Part-Time mode. Candidates pursuing PhD in the full-time mode should not be working elsewhere simultaneously and are expected to spend full-time working towards their PhD degree. However, candidates pursuing their PhD in the part-time mode are permitted to be employed during their PhD tenure.   3. External Candidates vs Non-External Candidates  Irrespective of the nature of participation, courses other than approved online courses are to be attended in person at IITGN, unless otherwise permitted. Apart from courses, the student’s availability to discuss his/her thesis and access research facilities on a regular basis is dependent upon whether the student is located in the Ahmedabad-Gandhinagar area or outside. Depending upon this, the student’s status shall be treated as External or Non-External (i.e. student from Ahmedabad-Gandhinagar region and available for research work/discussion/guidance in the Institute whenever needed).    Academic Affairs Advisory 35 (Version 2.0, March 2024)                                                             Page 2  Accordingly, the following are the possibilities of status of a PhD student.   Sl. No. Financial Sponsorship Nature of Participation External/ Non-External Eligible for Institute Fellowship 1 Institute Full-Time Non-External Yes 2 Non-Institute Full-Time Non-External No 3 Non-Institute Full-Time External No 4 Non-Institute Part-Time Non-External No 5 Non-Institute Part-Time External No  PhD students may be broadly classified to be under the ‘Regular’ category or under the Continuing Doctoral Programme (CDP) category depending on the nature of participation. CDP is meant for candidates who given their family or professional constraints are unable to pursue the regular doctoral programme offered by IITGN.  Norms for CDP (applicable for students admitted from Semester I, 2024-25 onwards)  § Candidates admitted to the PhD programme under the CDP category can directly join the PhD programme. § The residency requirement for the candidates will be the time required to do the course work offered offline. Further, the candidates are encouraged to spend at least two weeks every semester at IITGN to ensure steady progress in their PhD research work.  § The curricular requirements will be the same as that of a regular PhD programme. However, the requirements of Aarohan and Physical Education courses are waived off.  § Rest of the requirements for the PhD programme shall be applicable to CDP candidates as approved by the Institute from time to time.   Norms for CDP (applicable for students admitted before Semester I, 2024-25) In order to facilitate advanced educational opportunities for such candidates, IITGN will provide an opportunity of “advance admission” with one year of preparatory period; but once admitted they are required to follow the overall requirements of the regular PhD programme. The key features of CDP are listed below: § It is envisaged that not more than 20 percent of the total PhD degrees offered by IITGN will be comprised of such non-regular PhD candidates. § Applications should be sponsored and financially supported by their parent organizations/institutions. The parent organization/institutions should also preferably make provisions for activities such as travel to and participation in conferences. No scholarship/fellowship will be paid by IIT Gandhinagar. Academic Affairs Advisory 35 (Version 2.0, March 2024)                                                             Page 3  § The selected candidate should be available for a preparatory phase [extending over one year] during which they will spend a minimum of 90 days at the Institute in pursuit of background preparation, outlining of research proposal, literature review, fulfilling communication skills requirements etc.  § No tuition fees will be charged during the preparatory phase. Candidates will be required to pay other prescribed levies and deposits. § On successful completion of preparatory phase, the candidates will be formally enrolled for the PhD programme for which they will have to pay the prescribed tuition and other fees. § Such candidates are expected to complete the coursework early on in the doctoral programme. § For all candidates through CDP, minimum two years of residency is required, preferably before the proposal defense. In addition, the CDP programme also requires at least 2 weeks of residency at the Institute during each semester all through the PhD programme, unless it is waived in a semester by the Dean, Academic Affairs for genuine reasons.  § Candidates should be released by their parent organization/institutions for a minimum of two years full time study and research at IIT Gandhinagar. Subsequently, assessment of the candidate will be made by the Doctoral Studies Committee (DSC). If the candidate is deemed to have made substantial progress in his/her research and that there is a reasonable chance that the remaining work can be done by him/her in the parent organization/institution to fulfill the requirements for submission of the PhD thesis, candidates may be permitted to rejoin their parent organizations / institutions.  § IITGN does not require these non-regular candidates to have an advisor at their home institute/university/research lab/company. In case there is a co-advisor or mentor from the parent organization, he/she can also be included in the DSC of that student.  § All candidates admitted under this special scheme would be governed by all rules and regulations of IITGN, inclusive of conformity with the prescribed ethical norms. In some instances, the parent organization/institute may not be in a position to financially support the candidate(s) and the candidate(s) may be utilizing his/her/their earned / half-pay leave etc., IIT Gandhinagar may at its discretion give suitable waiver to related requirements.  Alumni Relations Advisory 03 (Version 1.0, December 2021)                                Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
IITGN YOUNG ALUMNI E XCELLENCE AWARD  
(As approved by the BoG in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021)  
 
 
IITGN alumni are in the early stages of their careers  and they have demonstrated the 
potential to be extremely successful in their lifetime. To recognise and honour the 
alumni who have been successful in the early stages of their career , the Board of 
Governors of the Institute in its 3 3rd meeting held on 15 November 2021 approved 
“IITGN Young Alumni Excellence Award” . The framework of the Award is the 
following.  
 
1. The " IITGN Young Alumni Excellence Award" may be considered for the following 
categories:  
 Outstanding professional achievement  
 Outstanding academic achievement  
 Outstanding entrepreneurship  
 Excellence in leadership, public influence, societal impact and volunteerism  
 
2. The following norms will apply :   
 Nomination to be based on demonstrated excellence AFTER the graduation 
from IITGN  
 Nomination to be considered AFTER 5 years of obtaining the first degree from 
IITGN  
 The alumnus/alumna must be under 45 years of age.  
 In the current instance, up to 5 such awards may be given in a year. The 
number  may be revised in due course.  
 
3. Nominations will be invited from alumni, IITGN community members, and well -
wishers of IITGN. Self -nominations will not be considered.  
 
4. The Director will constitute a Selection Committee with the following members. The 
Commi ttee will consider all the nominations received. During the deliberations, the 
Committee members may also add new nominations.  
 Director, IIT Gandhinagar (Chairman)  
 Professor in charge/Dean, Alumni Relation (or nearest equivalent in the 
Institute)  
 Professor -in-Charge/Dean, Institutional Advancement (or nearest equivalent 
in the Institute)   
 One current or former Director of any IIT  
 One present or former Council Nominee to the Board of Governors of IITGN  
 
5. Recommendations of the Selection Committee will be sent to the Chairman of the 
Board of Governors for approval. The awardee will be presented with a Certificate, 
Commendation and a Medallion.  Acad emic Affairs Advisory 37(Version 1.0, June  2016 )                                                              Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR ALLOWING EXTRA TIME TO PwD STUDENTS/CANDIDATES  
(As approved by the Senate  in its 23rd meeting held on 16th March 201 6) 
 
 
As per the directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India and based on the Office M emorandum (F.No. 
11-8/2014 -SC/ST dated 25 May 2015) received from Department of Higher Education, MHRD, Govt. 
of India regarding allowing extra time to PwD students in various examinations, the Senate in its 23rd 
meeting decided  on request the PwD student/  candidate with minimum 40% disability may be allowed 
extra time at the rate of 20 minutes per hour in all the examination s. 
 
  
 
IIT Gandhinagar  
Chemical Engineering  
 
General Lab Precautions & Chemical Safety Declaration 
 
I,  _________________________________________________________________________________  
(full name and r oll number/ emplo yee code) declar e tha t: 
1.  I have under gone the GLP and Chemic al sa fety training a t Chemic al Engineering , IITGN. 
2. Ihavelearn tthe guidelines tobefollowedinanylabor atoryatIITGandhinag arinsof arthe                  
experimen ts fall under the pur view of Chemic al sa fety. 
3.  I have learned about the haz ards in volved with chemic als and ho w to do haz ard control. 
4. I ha ve been guided on ﬁr e safety and ﬁr e ex nguisher s as w ell.  
5. I will adher e to and abide b y all GLP and sa fety norms.  
6.  I will t ake responsibility t o ensur e tha t any per son I super vise in the lab f ollows the same.  
7. Iwill conduct myself inthelabor atoryethically,maximiz esafetyformyself and mycolleagues, and                  
mi g ate risk s. 
8. IfIhaveconcerns and ques  ons, Iwill bring ittotheno ce ofmysuper visor ,project inves gator,                    
discipline c oordina tor and CSC (Campus Sa fety commi  ee) as appr opria te. 
9. Thatnon-c ompliance with theGLP and safetynorms willmakemeliable forpenalty bythecompe tent                   
authori es.  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
STUDENT /INTERN LAB TRAINER & SUPER VISOR  
 
SIGNA TURE: ____________________ SIGNA TURE: ____________________  
NAME: ________________________ NAME: ________________________  
DATE: _________________________ DATE: _________________________  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Recommenda  on b y the F ACULTY MEMBER (P rincipal in ves gator of the pr oject)  
Ms./Mr .  ____________________________________________________________________________  
may work in lab s  __________________________________________________________  unsuper vised,  
and in lab s  _______________________________________________________  only under super vision.  
 
 
 
SIGNA TURE: __________________________________ Date:  ___________________  
NAME: ______________________________________  
 
Faculty Affairs Advisory 24 (Version 1.0, January 201 9)                                   Page 1 of 1 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
INCENTIVE FOR  FACULTY TO SUPERVISE MORE PH D STUDENTS  
(As approved by the BoG in its 25th meeting held on 03 December 2018)  
 
 
Supervising PhD students is one of the essential and central roles of a faculty 
member at IIT Gandhinagar. IITGN has seen a steady rise in the number and quality 
of PhD students over the past few years. This aligns with the Institute’s goal of 
promoting ex cellence in research and training the next generation of scientific 
leaders.  
 
Supervising PhD students takes a lot of time and effort, and faculty members who 
supervise a large number of Ph.D. students also need more resources for supporting 
travel, consu mables, publication costs, and other miscellaneous costs. While some 
nominal money is available through CPDA, the resources available to a faculty member 
for such purposes can certainly be strengthened. Further, we expect the faculty to 
supervise larger nu mber of PhD students as they grow their research programs.  
 
Therefore , the Board of Governors of the Institute in its 25th meeting held on 03 
December 2018 approved that an amount of Rs. 1 lakh be transferred to a faculty 
member’s Professional Development Account (PDA) upon timely and successful 
defense of his/her student’s Ph.D. dissertation. It is envisioned that this incentive will 
help faculty members transition to supervise a larger number of PhD students 
without sacrificing on factors important for th eir growth.  This is also likely to indirectly 
provide an impetus to faculty research.  
 
In case a student is co -supervised by two or more faculty members, this amount may 
be split between them as appropriate. The support may not be available if the 
student is inordinately delayed, i.e, he/she has not submitted the Ph.D thesis within  
6 years of enrolment. The support may also be calibrated in case substantial 
modifications to  the thesis are required based on reviewers’ comments or a subpar 
Ph.D defense. Such cases be decided by the Director on recommendation of Dean, 
Academics.    
 
This expense will be covered from the Excellence Funds or the R&D income, subject 
to availability  of funds. This will be effective from the inception of the Ph.D program 
at the Institute . 
 General Administration Advisory 25 (Version 1.0, September 2021)                   Page 1 of 2 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR TECHNICAL RESIGNATION AND LIEN  
(As approved by the BoG in its 32nd meeting held on 20 August 2021)  
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 32nd meeting held on 20 August 2021 
has approved the following norms regarding technical resignation and lien : 
 
1. Resignations of the Institute employees proceeding to join Central Government/ 
State Government , Central/ State Autonomous Organizations will be treated as 
technical formality.  
 
2. Technical resignation will be considered only for those employees who apply 
through proper channel.  
 
3. Once an employee is relieved on technical resignation, he/she will generally be 
eligible for the following benefits:  
 
(a) Transfer of amount equivalen t to pay of balance earned leave in the credit of 
the employee on the day of relieving to join the new organization.  
(b) Transfer of service book, copy of medical examination report and reports on 
verification of character & antecedents carried out at the time of joining IITGN.  
(c) At present the provisions of gratuity is not applicable to IITGN. However, as 
and when gratuity benefits are extended to the employees of the Institute, the 
retirement gratuity component on pro -rata basis may be transferred to th e 
new organization of the employee released on technical resignation.  
 
4. Norms for Employees joining IITGN from other organization on grant of Technical 
Resignation: Such employee will be considered for joining IITGN on technical 
resignation provided his /her parent organization agrees to the following:  
 
(a) Payment of amount on account of unavailed portion of earned leave to IITGN 
by the parent organization/ employee.  
(b) Transfer of pro -rata retirement gratuity amount to IITGN by the parent 
organization/  employee. However, this will be applicable once the provision of 
gratuity is extended by the government to IITGN.  
(c) Transfer of service book, medical examination records, reports on verification 
of character and antecedents.  
(d) Protection of pay may be  allowed at IITGN, only on recommendation of the 
Selection Committee. However, no joining time or joining time pay will be given 
by IITGN.  
(e) The employee will be eligible for reimbursement of relocation expenses as 
approved by the Board in its’ 14th meet ing held on 02 August 2014 as 
amended from time to time.  
 
5. The benefit of lien in a post/ service/ cadre can be granted to a permanent 
employees of IITGN for upto two years, with a provision of extension for a third 
year in exceptional cases. Lien will n ot be treated as a right at the Institute and 
request of lien from an Institute employee will be considered by the appropriate 
Standing Committee of the Institute on a case to case basis considering the 
factors of performance/ contribution of the employee,  staff position in the General Administration Advisory 25 (Version 1.0, September 2021)                   Page 2 of 2 
 concerned section, impacts of the unfilled positions for the lien period, etc. The 
following will be the general terms and conditions:  
 
(a) On completion of lien period, the employee will be required to either resign or 
revert to his /her post at IIT Gandhinagar failing which his/her service at the 
Institute will stand terminated automatically.  
(b) In case, the employee reverts to IITGN, Leave Salary Contribution and Post -
Retirement Medical Scheme contribution at the applicable rates f or the period 
of lien has to be paid either by the employee or the employer where he 
worked during lien period.  
(c) The employee has to deposit enough money with IIT Gandhinagar towards 
payment of Group Insurance premium for the duration of his lien.  Student Affairs Advisory 14 (March 2020)  Page 1 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
STUDENT AFFAIRS  
 
NORMS FOR IIT GANDHINAGAR JUNIOR FELLOWSHIP  
 
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 6th meeting held on 10th March 2012)  
 
IIT Gandhinagar envisages to produce future leaders in various wal ks of life: engineering, 
science, management, education, social work, politics and the like. For this, our students must 
have the courage to take on paths different from the traditional paths taken by typical IIT 
graduates upon graduation. The proposed Fel lowship is meant to facilitate our fresh graduates to 
spend one year in a somewhat unconventional manner to experience certain profession type in 
which they may later embark upon, or to learn new skills, or just to experiment in life. For 
instance:   
 
Our students interested in taking a career with civil service may work as assistant to 
senior bureaucrats (say in education, social welfare, industries, energy etc) and gain 
insights in what a civil servant can or cannot do and how the government functions, 
executes projects, and serves the people.    
Our students passionate about education as a career may spend a year after BTech with 
IIT Gandhinagar or with any other educational institute either to teach (or assist in 
teaching, for instance, in conducting lab s, studios and tutorials), research, in institution 
building, or a combination of these. Thereafter, they may choose to go for higher studies 
and make a career in education.    
The students wanting to explore working in NGO sector may work as Fellow with a n 
NGO for a year before taking a major decision and plunging into it with long -term 
commitment.  
 
IITGN will do all it can to help provide such opportunities to its students, and will seek partners 
from various sectors to host (and hence, also to fund) our students. For this, the following 
common template of such Fellowships is purposed:  
 
1. A stipend of Rs 25,000 to Rs 40,000 per month plus a bachelor accommodation (similar 
to a student hostel) is suggested for the Fellowship. However, in some cases, the partn er 
organization may agree to a higher or a lower stipend.   
2. The partner organizations making a commitment for three or more years may attach their 
name to the Fellowship.   
3. The selected Fellow is expected to make a commitment for a fixed tenure of one year. 
Thereafter, the Fellow will move on and no extension will be granted.   
4. IIT Gandhinagar will facilitate and assist the Partner organizations in selection of most 
suitable candidates for the Fellowships.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Academic Affairs Advisory 1 7 (Version 3.0, January  2014 ) Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
COURSES AND CREDIT SYSTEM  
 
Course Number and Title  
 
Each course has a unique number consisting of a code to identify the discipline with 2 or 3 
characters of English alphabet followed by a three -digit number.  
HS:000  Humanities and Social Science  
ES:000  Engineering Sciences  
IN:000   Institute Electives  
LS:000   Biological Engineering  
CL:000   Chemical Engineering  
CE:000  Civil Engineering  
EE:000  Electrical Engineering  
MSE:000  Materials Science and Engineering  
ME:000   Mechanical Engineering  
CS:000  Computer Sciences and Engineering  
MS:000  Management Studies  
CH:000  Chemistry  
PH:000  Physics  
MA:000  Mathematics  
 
The first digit following the alphabetic code represents the level of the course.  
   XX:100  First year B.Tech level course  
   XX:200  Second year B.Tech level course  
   XX:300  Third year B.Tech level course  
   XX:400  Fourth year B.Tech level course  
   XX:500  MSc/MA level course  
   XX:600  PG/PhD level course  
   XX:700  PG/PhD year B.Tech level course  
 
Course C redits  
 
The credits of a course are based on the scaling of learning new concepts and developing 
in-depth understanding. Besides attending the lectures or laboratory sessions, the students 
are expected to spend a significant amount of time on learning the same concepts more in 
depth and imbibe those concepts through assignments, exercises, projects and reading 
reference material. The credits assigned to a course reflect the amount of effort a student is 
expected to put in that course.It is expected that the  student will spend at least double the 
period outside the lectures for further learning on the topics covered. Part of this further 
learning may come from tutorial component associated with some of these courses, which 
will help the students in streamlini ng their thoughts and discussing their doubts with the 
instructor/Tutor.  
 
Usually the courses will have 3 lectures per week with approximately 40 lecture hours in a 
semester, which is defined as a 4 credit course.  
 
The laboratory component is generally as sociated with the courses and the students are Academic Affairs Advisory 1 7 (Version 3.0, January  2014 ) Page 2 
 expected to spend almost the same time outside the lab for initial preparation and generating 
the reports. Generally, 2 -3 hours of laboratory contact hours per week will earn one credit.  
 
Besides the regular courses, there are equivalent credits given for Short module courses. 
Details of credit structure with some examples are given below.  
 
 
 
Type of Courses  
Basis of Credits  Contact Hours 
Distribution/Week  Approximate 
Contact Hours in a 
Semester  Credits  
Lecture  Tutorial  Lab 
Regular theory and 
Laboratory Courses  
 
10 Lectures for 1 credit  
No credit for tutorial  
2-3 Lab hours per week 
for 1 credit  2 
3 
3 
4 
0 
0 
2 
3 
3 1 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 0 
0 
0 
0 
2-3 
4 
3 
3 
2 28 + 12 + 0  
40 + 0 + 0  
40 + 12 + 0  
52 + 0 + 0  
0 + 0 + 20-30 
0 + 0 + 40  
28 + 0 + 22  
40 + 0 + 20  
40 + 12 + 20  3 
4 
4 
5 
1 
2 
4 
5 
5 
Short Module:  8-10 Lectures  
16-20 Lectures  1 
2 
 
Thus, a course may usually have credits in the range of 1 -5 with break -up as L -T--P-[C], 
where [L], [T] and [P] indicate number of contact hours per week for lecture, tutorial, and 
laboratory, respectively, and [C] indicates the credits, determined with the procedure outlined 
above.  Pre -requisites, if applicable, are also mentioned. A few courses without involving 
formal lectures, tu torials, or laboratory sessions like Physical Education, Seminar, etc. are 
assigned zero credits.  
 
 
Approval of a New Course  
 
A new course can be proposed by any faculty member in a prescribed format. The 
Coordinatorof the concerned discipline sends out th e proposal to all faculty members to elicit 
their comments and suggestions, with a copy to the Chairperson, SAPC.  After a minimum 
period of two weeks, the proposal is revised (if necessary), taking into account all the 
comments / suggestions received. The  Coordinator of the disciplinethen writes to the 
Chairperson, SAPC for approval of the course.  
 
The SAPC can constitute sub -committees to design/ modify core courses. The proposals are 
then circulated to all faculty for eliciting their comments/ suggestion s and subsequent 
revision (if necessary) before submitting to the Senate for approval. Similarly, the discipline 
specific courses are designed/modified by the concerned discipline, processed by respective 
DPC using the procedure stated above and submitted to SAPC for approval.  
 
Discontinuation of a Course  
 
Any course, which is not offered for five consecutive years, may be discontinued.  Facu lty Affairs Advisory 03 (Version 2.0, September  2018 )  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
GUIDELINES FOR EVALUATING FACULTY CANDIDATES  
 
1. IIT Gandhinagar has a vision and an aspiration that requires outstanding faculty. The 
quality of its faculty will have a tremendous impact in the years to come.  
 
2. Faculty recruitment is the most important and difficult task any university undertakes , 
and it requires very sound judgement . Hence, the highest level of integrity is expected 
from all tho se involved in the evaluation of faculty candidates.  
 
3. Recruiting unsuitable  candidates has serious long -term negative consequences for the 
institute. A conservative approach (of not recruiting when in doubt) is thus more 
suitable for faculty recruitment.  
 
4. We acknowledge that there would be errors of judgement. W e should be willing to 
accept errors and not compound them by offering justifications.  In addition, efforts 
need to be made to prevent recurrence of such errors.  
 
5. Ownership of the candidates  by IITGN faculty members  at a personal or a research 
area or a discipline  level is highly discouraged. Such ownership (e.g., recruiting more 
persons in one’s  area XYZ and hence pushing a candidate ) vitiates the mutual trust in 
the recruitment process.  
 
6. Advising faculty candidates on what to do (or not to do) during the selection process is 
highly undesirable.  
 
7. Disclosures: All disclosures about relationships/proximity with a candidate to be made 
to the Chairman, Faculty Search Committee . However, it is expected that the 
concerned faculty will partic ipate in the application processing for this candidate as for 
any other candidate without any bias.  
 
8. Mixing of issues is to be avoided, and comments on a candidate must not to be 
colored with any other issue. For instance, an outstanding candidate academic ally with 
an abrasive personality should not be called a poor candidate. Instead, it should be 
commented that he/she has excellent academic credentials with some personality 
issues.  
 
9. Comments to be given within the framework of recruitment philosophy and e thos at 
IITGN. For instance, currently , the Institute is focusing  on quality of candidate s rather 
than a specific area. Therefore, comments to be made keeping this in mind . 
 
10. Personality, values, and attitude of the candidate are no less important than his/her 
academic/research credentials. Therefore, these should be given  a lot of attention as 
well. 
 
11. Share the enthusiasm and the positives about  IITGN with the candidates. Any 
negatives about the Institute should be shared with the Head of the Department or the Facu lty Affairs Advisory 03 (Version 2.0, September  2018 )  Page 2 
 Director (and not with the faculty candidate ) so that the issues may be suitably 
addressed.  
 
12. Share all information (good or bad) available to you about the candidate with 
Chairman, Faculty Search Committee . If the information is from an unreliable source, 
make that explicit.  
 
13. Internal discussions are confidential and should not be shared with the candidates, 
irrespective of whether they are offered a position or not, and irrespective of whether 
they join or not.  
 
14. If candidates ask for information that you are not sure about, please refer them to 
Chairman, Faculty Search Committee  or Profess or-in-Charge (FA)  or Director . Also, 
seek the information for future use.  
 
15. Attend teaching sessions , research seminar s, and meet candidates to provide 
feedback on their technical and personal attributes. Meeting  candidates outside of 
one’s area of interest is  highly encouraged.  
 
16. Do not give your feedback on a faculty candidate in just one or two words (e.g. 
“promising candidate”, or “we should consider him”, or “strongly recommended”). 
Instead please mention his/her strong and weak points  and the basis of your 
judgement  before concluding with your recommendation.  
 
17. Some decisions on faculty recruitment are easy to make while many others are not. 
There are bound to be differences of opinions. If the final decisi on on a candidate is 
not in line with one ’s recommendation, it does not mean that one’s opinion was not 
considered important in arriving at the decision. Needless to state, if one feels strongly 
that an error of judgment has been made with regard to a cand idate, one may feel free 
to seek discussion with the Professor -in-Charge (FA)  and the Director .   
 
18. The Director may or may not have the opportunity to meet a candidate. Please do not 
create an expectation of a meeting with the Director . 
 
  Academic Affairs Advisory 22 (November 2023)  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR NORMS FOR TWO YEAR MSc PROGRAMME  (As approved by Senate in its 13th meeting held on 11th March 2013, updated in the  24th/36th/39th/41st/44th/55th/63rd meetings of the Senate)  1. Two-Year MSc Programme: Introduction  Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar (IITGN) introduced two-year Master of Science (MSc) programme from the academic year 2013-2014. The MSc programme in Chemistry, Mathematics and Cognitive Science was initiated in 2013 followed by the inclusion of Physics to the fold in 2014. The chief motivators for introducing the Two-Year MSc programme are as follows:  • Create a unique educational experience for students, especially those who may be interested in research careers. • Exploit the broad span of current faculty’s teaching and research expertise. • Create another layer of engaged and research-active post-graduate scholars in the institute, in addition to those that are part of MTech/MA programmes. 2. Philosophy of Two-Year MSc Programme  The Two-Year MSc programme at IITGN strives to create a niche for itself, in a world that is flooded with MSc degree offerings. The proposed structure of the programme includes the following features that echo the core philosophies of the institute:  • Enable students to acquire substantial breadth and depth in their areas of study. • Orient and enable student attitudes towards scientific research. • Expose students to areas beyond their core subjects. • Mandatory curriculum components originating from humanities and social sciences.  3. Admission/Selection Procedure  Admission to the Two-Year MSc programme will be on the basis of qualification in Joint Admission to Masters (JAM) examination being administered by the IIT system. Students may also join via Early-admit MSc. The emphasis on scholarly and research activities in IITGN’s Two-Year MSc programme may be factors for considering the following possibilities in future:  • Conducting interviews on JAM qualifiers. • Allowing students in one discipline who have qualified national level examination in that discipline to pursue a Master’s in another discipline. Disciplines that do not fall under the current purview of JAM may develop an appropriate selection strategy comprising viva voce and /or written examinations at the institute.  4. Curriculum Structure  • The Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics disciplines have a two-track structure for their MSc programs – a “coursework” track and a “research” track. • The coursework track emphasizes a larger number of core courses in the respective disciplines, while still including a flavor of research through project work. In contrast, the research track will  Academic Affairs Advisory 22 (November 2023) emphasize fewer core courses but greater research depth. It is generally expected that research done in the research track will be of publishable/patentable quality.  • All students at the end of their second semester will be given an option to choose the track they wish to pursue. Any student with a CPI of greater than or equal to 7.0 will be allowed to choose the track of his/her choice. Students whose CPI is below 7.0 may be given their choice after suitable consultations with the discipline faculty.  • The Cognitive Science MSc program will continue along a single track, but will, in spirit be aligned with the research track of the other three disciplines.  • Completing PG Orientation Programme Aarohan (2 Credits) is a mandatory graduation requirement for all MSc students. It is a two-week long programme that all the newly joined students are expected to successfully complete before they commence the first semester in their academic programme. In cases where a student fails to clear Aarohan, they must clear an additional two credits worth of HSS courses for graduation (applicable for all students who join from Semester – II, 2022-23 onwards).  • Students joining the MSc programme (from semester – I, 2021-22 onwards) must complete two Physical Education (PE) courses, one each in their first two semesters, as part of their graduation requirements. These courses will be evaluated on a Pass/No Pass grade basis.   A. Credit structure:  The Physics, Chemistry, and Mathematics disciplines have the following detailed breakup of credit structure within the two tracks. The Cognitive Science discipline has the following credit structure and will only have the research track.    Coursework Track credits Research Track credits   Chemistry Physics Math Chemistry Physics Math Cognitive Science Core 40 44 44 32 36 36 24 Elective 20 12 16 20 12 16 24 HSS* 12 12 12 08 08 08 08 Research 08 12 08 20 24 20 20+4# Total 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 Aarohan 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 PE (02 courses) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total Credits 80 + 2 80 + 2 80 + 2 80 + 2 80 + 2 80 + 2 80 + 2  #Summer Internship; *One of the HSS courses will be compulsory “Writing” course.  B. Course Structure: Basic framework of the curriculum will include the following:  1. Core courses: These are courses deemed essential to be part of the Master’s curriculum in the specified discipline.   2. Elective courses: These courses include those that are either offered by the parent discipline or aligned disciplines in the general area of the programme of study. In some cases, appropriate undergraduate courses could also be offered as electives for the MSc programme. However, electives could also be taken from the entire pool of post-graduate as well as undergraduate courses offered by any discipline in the institute.   3. HSS courses: In keeping with the institute’s philosophy of emphasizing the role of humanities and social sciences, students are required to take at least 8 (research track) or 12 (coursework track) credits of courses arising from those disciplines. The 4-credit “Writing” course will be required for all  Academic Affairs Advisory 22 (November 2023) students.  C. Nature of Research During Two-Year MSc: The nature of “research” performed during MSc is defined as:  i. Students will be required to select the general area and type of work at the end of the first semester and identify faculty member(s) willing to act as supervisor. Co- supervision by up to one faculty member may be permitted.  ii. Students may choose supervisor from outside their own disciplines and work under any advisor in the institute.  iii. Research project work can be research-oriented, developmental, industrially relevant, or a combination of these. The type of work selected would primarily depend on the interest of the student and the faculty supervisor(s).  iv. While, the nature of research/project work is mostly left to individual faculty supervisors, close ended projects will be preferred in the initial years. It is conceivable that within a few years of the programme, enough experience will be accumulated to permit open ended research projects with no deadline for submission.  v. Supervisors will award a letter grade for the total number of credits of research/project work.  vi. Towards the end of the programme, the student will be expected to submit a comprehensive report for assessment by an evaluation committee of at least 3 members with the supervisor chairing that committee.  vii. The students will be expected to register during the summer at the end of first year for up to 12 credits.  viii. The advisorship of research projects may change during the course of the programme. Such changes/switches will be assessed purely on the basis of performance in each project. In such cases, the student can compile all the work into one report for submission and evaluation.  ix. Mode of assessment of research projects is left at the discretion of disciplines. The assessment criterion being currently used for judging B.Tech. project progress may be used for guidance in this regard.  x. It is expected that engagement of students in research during the two-year MSc programme will translate into peer-reviewed publications.  D. Criteria for Continuing in the Two-Year MSc Programme  (Applicable for Students Admitted from AY 2023-24)  i. There will be no maximum permissible duration to complete the requirements of the programme. However, at any time, credits earned older than eight years will be deemed expired and will not count towards the graduation requirements. After 7 semesters, a request from the student is needed to extend the programme on a semester by semester basis.  ii. Any student failing to earn a minimum of 28 credits within one year from his/her start of the  Academic Affairs Advisory 22 (November 2023) first year programme (either due to admission or due to restart) should start his/her programme afresh or exit the programme. A student needs to secure a passing grade for earning the credits registered for the course.  iii. If the programme is restarted, then the credits earned and semesters registered prior to restart will not be carried over.   iv. Restart will be permitted only once.  v. In case the CPI of a student falls below 6.0 out of 10, the fellowship provided, if any, by the Institute will be stopped immediately and for the future.    (Applicable for Students Admitted before AY 2023-24)  i. A student who fails to earn a minimum of 8 credits at the end of his/her first active semester must ordinarily exit the programme. However, he/she may make an earnest request to continue into the second semester by submitting a strong justification and a clear work/graduation plan. Both of these must be vetted by the student’s faculty advisor, who must also provide a detailed rationale for why the student may be allowed to continue. This request may be reviewed by the Dean (Academics), who will then present the case to the Senate for a decision. Favourable decisions are to be rare and given in exceptional circumstances.   ii. The request to continue must be received in time, i.e., well before the date of registration of the student’s potential second semester. If the request is not received by this time, it will be presumed that the student is no longer interested and the student’s programme will be terminated.  iii. If the request for continuation is approved by the Senate, the student may register for the second semester. If this student fails to earn at least 26 credits at the end of his/her first two active semesters, he/she must exit the programme. However, at this point, the student will have the opportunity to restart the programme afresh. The restart option can be exercised only once.  iv. If the programme is restarted, then the credits earned and semesters registered prior to restart will not be carried over.  v. Upon restarting, the student must earn a minimum of 12 credits in his/her first semester and 15 credits in the second semester or else his/her programme will be terminated and no further chance will be given.  vi. The maximum period allowed to complete the programme will be three years (the first year or first semester if repeated will not be counted).  vii. In case Institute fellowship/ scholarship has been provided during the failed semesters, it will be adjusted in the following semesters.  viii. Students may opt for the rules for termination as applicable for students admitted from AY 2023-24.    Academic Affairs Advisory 22 (November 2023)  E. Other Provisions of the Two-Year MSc Programme  i. Students who have performed exceptionally in the two-year MSc programme may be offered direct entry into the Ph.D. programme at IITGN. Disciplines may decide criterion for judging exceptional performance (e.g. CPI) of students.  ii. Outstanding performers may also be considered for short internships in prominent institutes worldwide. Work performed in such internships may be applied towards research/project work credits. Disciplines may decide the number, duration and timing of such internships.  5. Discipline-Wise List of Core Courses for MSc Curriculum:  Chemistry Physics Mathematics Cognitive Science Interpretative Organic Spectroscopy Classical Mechanics Linear Algebra Computation and Cognition Physical Organic Chemistry Quantum Mechanics I Algebra I Fundamental Neuroscience Transition Metal Chemistry Mathematical Methods in Physics Topics in Real Analysis Cognitive Psychology Quantum Chemistry Methods of Experimental Physics I Topology Research Methods in Cognitive Science Organometallic and Bioinorganic Chemistry Quantum Mechanics II Complex Analysis Experimental Techniques in Cognitive Science Reactions and Mechanisms in Organic Chemistry Classical Electrodynamics Ordinary Differential Equations Philosophy of Mind Organic Chemistry Lab; Inorganic Chemistry Lab  (2 credits each) Computational Physics Functional Analysis  Physical Chemistry Lab; Analytical and Computational Chemistry Lab  (2 credits each) Methods of Experimental Physics II Advanced Numerical Methods in Engineering  Advanced Organic Chemistry – only for coursework track Statistical Mechanics Algebra II  Solid State Chemistry and Applications – only for coursework track Condensed Matter Physics – only for coursework track Partial Differential Equations – only for coursework track   Atomic and Molecular Physics – only for coursework track Introduction to Differential Geometry –only for coursework track   General Administration Advisory 03 (Version 3.0, January  2021) Page 1 of 1 
 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR EXCELLENCE AWARDS FOR STAFF  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 3rd meeting held on 07 January 2011 , in its 20th 
meeting held on 05 December 2016 , in its 29th meeting held on 20 August 2020  and  
in its 30th meeting held on 17 December 2020 ) 
 
 
In order to recognize and encourage meritorious staff in the Institute, Merit Awards are 
instituted for the non -teaching staff as per the following  norms : 
 
a) Annually, a number of non -teaching staff who have performed exemplary service and 
shown sustained devotion towards the Institute, will be recognized by a merit 
certificate and a cash award of Rs 50,000/ -. 
 
b) In the first instance, up to four such awards were  given annually. As the number of 
staff increase, the number of such awards may be enhanced but the number must be 
capped at around 10% of total strength of the staff in the Institute.  
 
c) All staff drawing their salary from the Institute, regardless of being  full time/ part time, 
in pay scale/ on consolidated salary, temporary/on contract/ on deputation/ 
permanent will be eligible for consideration. Similarly, any staff working through 
outsourcing agencies or the staff engaged by any company/ centre/ cell etc . 
established by the Institute will also be eligible. However, in order to be eligible, the 
person must be working with the Institute for a minimum period of one year. Once a 
staff member has received the award, he/she will not be eligi ble for the award fo r the 
next three  years.  
 
d) Nominations for the award will be invited from the community (faculty, students and 
staff) as well as the unit heads, and the same shall be considered by a Committee to 
be appointed by the Director. The Committee may also take int o account the “user 
feedback” on performance of concerned staff and may choose to interview some of 
the candidates (and their respective supervisors) before finalizing its report. 
Recommendations of the Committee will be considered by the Director and upon  his 
endorsement of the same, approval of the Board of Governors will be sought.  
 
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 3 2 (Version 1.0, December 2021)                                      Page 1 of 4 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
INCUBATION POLICY FOR FACULTY MEMBERS TO START 
ENTREPRENEURIAL VENTURES  
(As approved by the BoG in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021)  
 
 
IIT Gandhinagar aspires to promote world -class research that will make a positive 
impact on society today and groom the leaders and creators of tomorrow’s 
technologies. IIT Gandhinagar encourages the students, faculty members, 
researchers to take up entrepreneurship to translate their technologies developed in 
the Labs.  
In recognition of the crucial roles of innovation and entrepreneurship, the Institute 
started its Entrepreneurship Center in 2012, even before the first batch of 
undergraduate students graduated. In 2015 Institute established a section 8 
Company “IIT Gandh inagar Innovation and Entrepreneurship Center” (IIEC) to 
promote innovation, entrepreneurship and technology commercialization activities.  
IIEC is governed by well laid policy framework for supporting the entrepreneurial 
ventures (including the ventures p romoted by IITGN students, faculty and staff). The 
Board of Governors of the Institute in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021 
approved the following incubation policy for faculty members to start entrepreneurial 
ventures.  
The basic principles of the policy are as under.  
a. Consistency with the core vision of IIT Gandhinagar.  
b. Creating enabling environment to encourage faculty start -ups. 
c. Provide guidance to manage conflict of interest, intellectual property, utilization of 
Institute’s resources, etc.   
 
1. General conditions:  
a. A faculty member who wishes to pursue entrepreneurship should ensure that 
their responsibilities at the Institute are not compromised by their start up 
related responsibilities.  
b. A faculty member can pursue the role of a founder with executive position in a 
start-up company, only if their start -up related activities do not conflict with the 
activities of the Institute.  
c. If the role in the start -up involves significant time commitment which is more 
than the maximum time prescribed for th e Consultancy work (which is on 
average, one day per week) the faculty member will have to opt for a short -
leave or long -leave from the Institute.  
d. The faculty member shall first take administrative approval from the Institute 
before starting the company and should clearly disclose the conflict of 
interests.  
e. A faculty member may be allowed to take up entrepreneurial activities where 
there is a visibl e potential to create a technological / commercial and / or 
social impact. However, activities like routine service/consultancy, trading, 
non-scientific businesses, business involving coaching, teaching and/or 
development of educational content may not be allowed.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 3 2 (Version 1.0, December 2021)                                      Page 2 of 4 
 f. The start -up founded by the faculty members (alone or in partnership with 
other entrepreneurs) must  incubate at IIEC or take space in the IIT 
Gandhinagar Research Park on the prevailing terms and conditions.  
g. A faculty member who is allowed by the  Institute to pursue entrepreneurial 
activity must report to the Institute their terms of engagement and any financial 
transactions (remuneration, equity, etc.) with the company twice a year . 
h. Wherever Institute’s IP/know -how is utilized in a startup founde d by a faculty 
member, the startup will formally sign a licensing agreement with the Institute.  
i. Wherever there is a usage of any laboratory or equipment and other 
resources of the Institute for the start -up related activity, the start -up company 
shall pay the charges towards using Institute’s Labs, equipment, other 
resources as per the prescribed norms and guidelines.  
j. It is encouraged to engage students to be part of the faculty start -ups. It will 
provide opportunity for students to gain experience of entre preneurship while 
studying and may provide leadership to the start -up company after graduation . 
k. If the faculty member receives remuneration and/or equity in lieu of 
remuneration, the Institute shall receive 20% of the gross remuneration and/ 
or the 20% of the gross proceeds of the equity, whenever redeemed.  
 
2. Possible ways of association of faculty members with start -ups:  
 
a. As a founder of a company without any executive role  and without any 
IP/ technology  from IITGN:  
i. In the case where a faculty member is one  of the founders (Director/ 
additional Director/ share holder) in the company without any executive 
role and without utilizing any IP/ technology know -how from Institute, such 
association shall be treated as individual association.  
ii. The faculty member shall  not allow or facilitate use of Institute’s resources 
and/or IP in transacting businesses of the start -up and there should be no 
conflict of Interest.  
iii. The company must be incubated at IIEC or housed at the Research Park 
as per the prevailing policy of IIEC  and Research Park.  
iv. The usage of any lab, equipment or other resources of the Institute by the 
start-up company shall be charged as per the prescribed norms of the 
Institute.  
v. The faculty member shall associate with a company that is working in a 
domain or in area of their research expertise.  
vi. The total time commitment in such start -ups plus that in other consultancy 
projects shall not exceed the consultancy norms of the Institute.  
 
b. As a founder of company without any executive role  and using IP/ 
technology  from IITGN:  
i. In the case where a faculty member is one of the founders (Director/ 
additional Director/ share holder) without any executive role but such start -
up is utilizing IP/ technology know -how from the Institute, the start -up will 
formally sign a lice nsing agreement with the Institute.  
ii. Institute shall charge a license fee in the form of equity/royalty/portion of 
profit/lumpsum payment towards the license of the technology/know -how 
as decided by the Institute.  
iii. In addition, the points from ii to vi  in clause 2(a) are applicable.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 3 2 (Version 1.0, December 2021)                                      Page 3 of 4 
  
c. As a founder of company with an executive role  and using IP/ 
technology  from IITGN:  
i. In the case where a faculty member is one of the founders (Director/ 
additional Director/ share holder) of company and is expected to take  an 
executive role in the company and such start -up also utilizes the IP/ know -
how of the Institute. In case the total time commitment of faculty member 
in the start -up exceeds 1 day per week (as stipulated in clause 1c) the 
faculty member must avail of ap propriate leave as per the prevailing leave 
rules of the Institute while working for the company.  
ii. The start -up will formally sign a licensing agreement with the Institute.  
iii. Institute shall charge a license fee in the form of equity/royalty/portion of 
profit/lumpsum payment towards the license of the technology/know -how 
as decided by the Institute.  
iv. In addition, all other points from ii to v in clause 2(a) are applicable.  
 
d. As a founder of company with an executive role  and without using IP/ 
technology  from IITGN:  
i. In this case, a faculty member is one of the founders (Director/ additional 
Director/ share holder) of the start -up and is expected to take an executive 
role in the company. However, no IP/ technology know how of the Institute 
is involved. In case the total time commitment of faculty member for the 
start-up exceeds 1 day per week (as stipulated in clause 1c) the faculty 
member must avail of appropriate leave as per the prevailing leave rules of 
the Institute while working for the company.  
ii. In ad dition, all other points from ii to v in clause 2(a) are applicable.  
 
e. As a mentor/ advisor to a start -up company incubated at IIEC or outside:  
i. The faculty members are encouraged to provide mentoring to start -up 
companies incubated at IIEC, but may also be  permitted to mentor start -
ups not associated with IIEC.  
ii. The time commitment and remuneration shall be treated as per the 
consultancy norms of the Institute.  
 
3. Conflict of Interest resolution:  
a. Faculty member must clearly disclose financial and other intere sts (if any) in 
the start -up company.  
b. Involvement of any Institute staff in activities at the startup will require prior 
permission from the Institute with full disclosure of financials involved.  
c. Faculty startups are encouraged to formally involve students in startup related 
activities in internships, projects, etc. However, any informal/ad -hoc 
involvement of students is not permitted in faculty startups.  
d. Institute facilities (other than those specifically allowed for start -ups), tax 
exempt status, or purchasing benefits cannot be used for company purposes.  
e. If a faculty member proposes to engage with a startup founded by students 
before or after their graduation from the Institute, the faculty member is 
required to disclose this fact while seeking ap proval from the Institute. The 
faculty member should mention all courses taught by her/him along with the 
grades scored by the students in the courses.  
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 3 2 (Version 1.0, December 2021)                                      Page 4 of 4 
 f. Faculty members will be required to submit the declaration on potential 
conflict of interest twice a year. The same will be assessed by the Institute 
after receipt of the information for continuation of permission to engage with 
the company.  
g. Faculty member must clearly separate and distinguish ongoing research at 
the institute from the work being conducte d or proposed to be conducted at 
the startup/ company.  
h. In the case of willful violation of any of the above conditions by the faculty 
member, the Institute reserves the right to withdraw the permission for the 
startup by the faculty members and may also in itiate appropriate 
administrative / disciplinary action.  
  
Academic Affairs Advisory 08 (Version 1.0, July 2012)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
ADMISSION FOR  M.TECH. ON PART -TIME BASIS  
 
(Senate in its 7th Meeting held on 2nd April 2011  approved the following)  
 
Admissions for M.Tech.on  part-time basis will be considered subject to compatibility in 
respect of logistics related to course work.  
A suitable supplementary advertisement may be issued in the local news papers, inviting 
applications for admission in the  M.Tech. programme on part -time basis. The following 
provisions apply towards the part -time M.Tech. programme:    
 Admission to the part -time M.Tech. programme will be made along the lines of the 
regular M.Tech. programme.  
 Eligibility may be relaxed from that required for the regula r programme. However, 
cumulative experience of at least two years is necessary for admission to the part -
time programme.  
 Programme expectations in terms of coursework and thesis will be on par with the 
regular programme. The total duration of the part -time degree option can be 
extended to 3 (three) years.  
 No financial support will be provided by the institute.  
 The degree awarded will be identical to that of the regular M.Tech. programme.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  General Administration Advisory 11 (Version 5.0, January 201 7) Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
CHILDREN’S EDUCATION SCHOLARSHIP FOR  
IITGN COMMUNITY MEMBERS  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 5th meeting held on 14th December 2011 and 
revised by the  Board of Governors in its 7th, 9th, 15th and 2 0th meeting ) 
The Institute has a strong sense of commitment to the well being and growth of its 
community members, employees as well as those who may not be employees of the 
Institute but are essential to the effective functioning of the Institute. While t he Institute’s 
regular employees have access to a number of government -specified benefits, its contract 
employees as well as those who work for the contractors supporting our functioning do not 
receive such benefits.   
Being an academic institution, we are  strongly committed to education at all levels.  A matter 
of particular concern is the education of the children of all those connected with us, 
particularly those who are most vulnerable.  Hence, Child ren’s  Education Scholarships have 
been set up to partia lly support the educational expenses of children of those members of 
the IITGN community who are not our regular employees and hence are not eligible for the 
usual benefits. This cover s the contract and daily wage employees of the Institute, the 
employees of our contractors (such as housekeeping, security, and mess), and any others 
who are closely linked with the Institute  in a direct manner (e.g., the canteen staff in and 
around the hostels and the Institute). The effort is to define the eligibility most l iberally, 
rather than conservatively.  
Initially, the financial support for school education (up to class 12) for the children of such 
persons was up to the tune of Rs. 5,000/ - per family in a year. With experience and results, 
the limit has been enhanced periodically.  
The current provision , as of January 2017 , is of scholarship at a flat rate of Rupees 10,000/ - 
per year (i.e.,  Rupees 5,000/ - half-yearly) for each eligible child (up to two children per 
family) of contract employees/ workers on submission of  the proof in support of continuing 
study of the child.  Academic Affairs Advisory 23 (March 2024) ) Page 1  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR NORMS FOR PhD PROGRAMME  (As approved by Senate in its 18th meeting held on 25th September 2014, updated in the  24th/32nd/36th/39th/44th/60th/63rd/64th/67th/68th meetings of the Senate)  The fundamental mission of the PhD programme of IITGN is to foster creative and scholarly inquiry while inculcating intellectual habits required for successful careers in teaching, research, innovation and entrepreneurship. At its core, it is envisioned that an IITGN PhD degree will be a very personal journey for the candidate, during which they undergo deep introspection and mature both academically and personally. Without compromising on the above core ideals and fundamental mission, the PhD programme at IITGN is expected to afford a great deal of flexibility and independence while encouraging the various interdisciplinary interactions needed for learning. The PhD programme is integral to IITGN's mission of furthering its status as a premier research Institute, and PhD students form the backbone of the research being conducted at the Institute. In short, by providing a dynamic learning experience, the PhD programme at IITGN is meant to be an intellectually exciting journey that shapes students into creative thinkers.  The students are admitted to the Institute and NOT to the departments. The student shall be assigned a department by the Institute. PhD students may be broadly classified under the ‘Regular’ category or under the continuing doctoral programme (CDP) category depending on the nature of participation in the PhD programme. The highlights of IITGN's PhD programme can be summarized in three distinct ways:  § First, the programme facilitates exposure to diverse information and ideas to expand the breadth of the student's knowledge. § Second, the programme will enable interaction and face-to-face professional learning through collaboration with the faculty and peers. § Third, the programme is about a scholarly culture that encourages knowledge creation and dissemination of research in a timely manner.  A. Thesis Advisor and Doctoral Studies Committee Each PhD student will be allotted a thesis advisor as early as possible and definitely within a semester of joining the PhD programme. The thesis advisor will propose a doctoral studies committee (DSC) to the Dean, Academic Affairs for approval within one semester of admission and subsequent joining in the PhD programme. The DSC shall comprise of the thesis advisor as convener and two or more faculty members (at least one member from the department as that of the student and one from a department different from that of the student) as members. If felt necessary, the DSC may include persons from outside the Institute. Although the DSC will carry out several assessments related to the coursework and thesis work, its primary mandate is to monitor the progress of the student and mentor the student from time to time. [Note: Inclusion of outside members into DSC typically requires approval of the Chairman, Senate.]  B. PG Orientation Programme (Aarohan)  (a) PhD students must undergo the PG Orientation Programme Aarohan (2 credits) in the beginning and successfully clear it. Clearing of Aarohan is a mandatory graduation requirement for all PhD students.  (b) Aarohan is a two-week long programme that all the newly joined students are expected to successfully complete before they commence the first semester in their academic Academic Affairs Advisory 23 (March 2024) ) Page 2  programme. It would have 5 themes (Inventing and Discovering, Communication, Professionalism and Ethics, Social Engagement, Well-being).  (c) In case a student fails to clear Aarohan, s/he must clear an additional two credits worth of HSS courses for meeting the graduation requirements in lieu of successful clearing of Aarohan. (applicable for all students who join from Semester – II, 2022-23 onwards) [Ref: Senate 2022.5.10].  (d) Students who completed a degree or diploma from IIT Gandhinagar prior to joining the PhD programme may seek approval from the Dean of Academic Affairs for exemption from the requirement of clearing Aarohan.   (e) Successful completion of the programme may be mandatory for release of fellowship to the students.  (f) The requirement of Aarohan is waived off for students under the IITGN-PRL/IITGN-SAC collaborative PhD programmes/CDP.  C. Credit Requirements (applicable for students admitted from Semester II, 2023-24 onwards)  For PhD students, the minimum credit requirements for graduation is outlined in Table I. Please note that meeting this minimum credit requirement will not automatically lead to a PhD degree.   Table I Minimum Credit Requirements for Graduation Qualifying Degree Type I II III Qualifying Degree BTech, BE or equivalent 4-year Bachelor's degree MSc, MA or equivalent 5-year Master's degree MTech, ME,  two years' MPH, MPharm or MPhil or equivalent Credits through Aarohan 2 2 2 Minimum Credits through Coursework 20 20 16 Minimum Credits through Research 80 80 80 Total Minimum Credits for Graduation 100 100 96 No. of Physical Education Courses 1 1 1  (a) The thesis advisor and/or DSC may set additional requirements of up to 32 credits for courses over and above the minimum requirements for graduation, for enhancement of knowledge. (b) Students joining the PhD programme must complete one Physical Education (PE) course as part of their graduation requirements. This course will be evaluated on a Pass/No Pass grade basis.  (c) The requirement of PE course is waived off for students under the IITGN-PRL/IITGN-SAC collaborative PhD programmes/CDP. (d) Minimum credits through coursework shall include the following in addition to other courses: i. At least 2 credits must be completed through Independent Research and/or Independent Seminar and/or Independent Teaching. The Independent Teaching course will include mentorship by a faculty member, successful completion of the teaching certification programme and independent teaching of at least two classes (of 1 Academic Affairs Advisory 23 (March 2024) ) Page 3  hour 20 minutes each). The mode of evaluation will be developed and announced by the departments.  ii. A 4-credit Writing course. This may be replaced by other courses for PhD students with MTech/MSc/MA degree from IIT Gandhinagar. (e) PhD students are normally required to do postgraduate level courses (course codes 6XX or above) towards meeting their coursework requirements. However, upto 4 credits of undergraduate level courses (course codes 5XX or below) may be permitted towards meeting coursework requirements.  (f) PhD students are also allowed to take up to 4 credits of online PG courses from the list approved by the institute. (g) PhD students must complete their thesis before they are allowed to go for submission as per the laid out process and therefore may need to do additional credits through research (over the minimum credits through research). (h) Full-time doctoral students should register for a minimum of 12 credits in regular semesters and 8 credits during the summer term. Maximum registration can be up to 22 credits in regular semesters and 10 credits in summer term. (i) All doctoral students under Regular category must comply with one semester of minimum residency requirement. The residency requirement for candidates under CDP will be the time required to do the coursework offered offline.  (j) A sample coursework plan is shown in Table II.   Table II Sample Course Plan (applicable for students admitted from Semester II, 2023-24 onwards) Qualifying Degree I II III BTech, BE or equivalent 4-year  Bachelor's degree MSc, MA or equivalent 5-year  Master's degree MTech, ME,  two years' MPH, MPharm or  MPhil or equivalent Aarohan  (2 credits) Aarohan  (2 credits) Aarohan  (2 credits) Writing  (4 credits) Writing  (4 credits) Writing  (4 credits) Physical Education (1 x 0 credits) Physical Education (1 x 0 credits) Physical Education (1 x 0 credits) Independent Research/Seminar/Teaching (2 credits) Independent Research/Seminar/Teaching (2 credits) Independent Research/Seminar/Teaching  (2 credits) Other Courses  (Min. 14 credits) Other Courses  (Min. 14 credits) Other Courses  (Min. 10 credits)  D. Credit Requirements (applicable for students admitted before Semester II, 2023-24)  Students entering the programme will have to take total credits ranging from 88 through 120, out of which coursework credits (typical course is of 4 credits) can range between 32 through 64, depending upon the area of interest/discipline and the previous degree attained by the student. In addition, all PhD students must complete the PG Orientation Programme Aarohan (2 credits) and two courses of Physical Education (0 credits). For a detailed description of the minimum coursework and research credits required, see the Table below.  Academic Affairs Advisory 23 (March 2024) ) Page 4  Table III Graduation Requirements [Ref: Senate 2017.1.7, 2022.2.9] Qualifying Degree Type I II III Qualifying Degree BTech, BE or equivalent 4-year Bachelor's degree MSc, MA or equivalent 5-year Master's degree MTech, ME,  two years' MPH, MPharm or MPhil Credits through Aarohan 2 2 2 Minimum Credits through Course Work 64 44 32 Minimum Credits through Research 52 52 52 Total Minimum Credits for Graduation 120 100 88 No. of Physical Education Courses 2 2 2  Table III gives the minimum credit requirements through coursework and research for successfully completing the PhD programme. However, meeting this minimum credit requirement will not lead to a PhD degree.   (a) In exceptional situations, if an entering student has taken a substantially high number of courses as part of their previous degrees, a waiver of up to 10 credits towards lowering course requirements may be granted. The waiver may be recommended by the DSC and the Dean of Academic Affairs and approved by the Chairman Senate.  (b) Chairman, Senate may grant suitable waiver of coursework credits to PhD students admitted during Semester I, 2023-24 on case by case basis upon recommendations of their DSC, and Dean (Academic Affairs).  (c) Students joining the PhD programme (from Semester I, 2021-22 till Semester I, 2023-24) must complete two Physical Education (PE) courses, one each in their first two semesters, as part of their graduation requirements. These courses will be evaluated on a Pass/No Pass grade basis.   (d) The requirement of PE courses is waived off for students under the IITGN-PRL collaborative PhD programme [Ref: Senate 2024.1.8].  (e) A 4-credit Writing course is required to be taken by all doctoral students. The requirement of completing the Writing course is waived for PhD scholars who have completed MTech/MSc/MA degree from IIT Gandhinagar [Ref: Senate 2023.2.10] [Note: The waiver of 4 credits will be in addition to credit waiver mentioned in section D(a)].  (f) Candidates pursuing their degree in Engineering and Natural Sciences must earn at least four credits through HSS courses. Similarly, the candidates pursuing their degree in HSS must earn at least four credits through Engineering and Natural Sciences courses. [Note: The four credits of the HSS course requirement for candidates pursuing their degree in Engineering and Natural Sciences is in addition to the Writing course.]  (g) PhD students may credit undergraduate courses (up to 5xx level) at IITGN. However, for students admitted before Semester II, 2023-24, only up to 8 credits of such courses can be counted towards the graduation requirement. In addition, they may be allowed to count one UG course (up to 5xx level) of HSS towards their graduation requirements [Ref: Senate 2016.2.22]. [Note: All other courses must be at the postgraduate level, with a course code of 6XX or above.]  (h) The DSC may set additional requirements for courses over and above those in Table III based on the student's background.  Academic Affairs Advisory 23 (March 2024) ) Page 5  (i) Full-time doctoral students should register for a minimum of 12 credits each semester. Maximum registration in a semester can be up to 22 credits unless otherwise permitted for higher credits without thesis registration by the Dean, Academic Affairs.  (j) Out of the minimum credits through coursework, a minimum of 12 credits must be completed through project-based courses. Each unit of this project course [independent research project (IN 791)/ independent research seminar (IN 792)] will have three credits, and four of such courses must be registered during the programme. Project-based courses may include activities including lab-based experiments, independent study with a faculty, design study, book review etc., that involve at least 100 hours of overall engagement for a 3-credit course by the student in a given semester.   Note: For more details on project-based courses, refer to the advisory entitled "Norms for Independent Research Project, Independent Research Seminar, Independent Teaching and Seminar Courses for PhD Students".  (k) In addition, a student can earn proficiency credits by engaging in any of the approved activities. These credits are typically earned in later stages of the PhD programme (after the qualifying examination). Such credits will be mentioned in the student's transcript; however, these will not be counted towards graduation requirements. A student should generally earn at least six such credits before graduation.  (l) All doctoral students must comply with two calendar years of the minimum residency requirement.  (m) In addition to the above credit requirements, every student will have to register for one credit of seminar attendance every semester, expecting them to attend on an average one seminar per week from across the Institute. Based on the student's consistent attendance, Pass (P)/Fail (F) grades will be awarded by the advisor. However, this additional credit will not be counted toward the total credit requirement for graduation. This requirement is not applicable from Semester II, 2023-24 for all PhD students [Ref: Senate 2023.5.5].   (n) A sample course plan for PhD students is shown in Table IV.   Table IV Sample Course Plan (applicable for students admitted before Semester II, 2023-24) Qualifying Degree I II III BTech, BE or equivalent 4-year Bachelor's degree MSc, MA or equivalent 5-year Master's degree MTech, ME,  two years' MPH, MPharm or MPhil Aarohan  (2 credits) Aarohan  (2 credits) Aarohan  (2 credits) Writing  (4 credits) Writing  (4 credits) Writing  (4 credits) Physical Education (2 x 0 credits) Physical Education (2 x 0 credits) Physical Education (2 x 0 credits) HSS Courses (4 credits)  or Engineering/Natural Science Courses (4 credits) [See Section D(e)] HSS Courses (4 credits)  or Engineering/Natural Science Courses (4 credits) [See Section D(e)] HSS Courses (4 credits)  or Engineering/Natural Science Courses (4 credits) [See Section D(e)] Independent Project Courses  (Min. 12 credits) Independent Project Courses  (Min. 12 credits) Independent Project Courses  (Min. 12 credits) Other Courses  (Min. 44 credits) Other Courses  (Min. 24 credits) Other Courses  (Min. 12 credits)  Academic Affairs Advisory 23 (March 2024) ) Page 6  E. Academic Performance Requirements (applicable for students admitted from Semester I, 2023-24 onwards) (a) The minimum CPI for graduation is 6.5 out of 10. (b) There will be no maximum permissible duration to complete the requirements of the programme. However, at any time, credits earned older than eight years will be deemed expired and will not count towards the graduation requirements. After 13 semesters, a request from the student is needed to extend the programme on a semester by semester basis. [Note: Course credits as well as research credits earned older than eight years will be deemed expired.] (c) The thesis units registered by a student will be graded using letter grades A, B, C and F, where A, B and C are passing grades and F is a fail grade. A student may register for one 4 credit thesis unit or a multiple of it and can be graded according to the number of units which they have registered for. The thesis grades will not be counted towards the CPI calculation. (d) If the student accumulates F grades in more than 24 credits of thesis units any time during their PhD programme, the student will have to exit the programme.   (e) Whenever the CPI of a student becomes less than 6.0, the Institute shall immediately stop fellowship, if any.  (f) Sections E(a) to E(e) are applicable only for students admitted from academic year 2023-24. Students from previous batches may also opt for these instead of sections F(a) to F(d) [Ref: Senate 2023.1.7].  F. Academic Performance Requirements (applicable for students admitted before Semester I, 2023-24)  (a) The minimum CPI for graduation is 6.5 out of 10.  (b) The maximum duration of the PhD programme will be 7 years and 6 years for students who joined the PhD programme with a qualifying degree type I or II and III (as per Table III) respectively.   (c) The minimum CPI for continuing the programme at any point is 6.0 out of 10. That is, if, at any stage, the student has a CPI less than 6.0, the programme will be terminated.  (d) In case the CPI of a student falls below 6.5 out of 10, or the student accumulates eight or more Us towards thesis grades, the fellowship provided by the Institute will be stopped permanently. The student may seek financial support from projects or other Institute activities through individual effort. In exceptional cases, the continuation of the fellowship may be approved by the Director on the recommendation of the Dean, Academic Affairs.   (e) Sections E(a) to E(e) are applicable only for students admitted from academic year 2023-24. However, students from previous batches may also opt for these instead of sections F(a) to F(d) [Ref: Senate 2023.1.7]. [Note: A request for this change may be sent to the academic office for processing and approval.]  G. Qualifying Examination (applicable for students admitted from Semester II, 2023-24 onwards) (a) Qualifying examinations shall be conducted three times a year as per the qualifying examination calendar of the Institute. The students must appear for the qualifying examination during the qualifying examination window. In case of failure in the qualifying examination, one chance shall be given to the student to pass the qualifying examination immediately in the next scheduled regular slot for qualifying examination as per the calendar.  Academic Affairs Advisory 23 (March 2024) ) Page 7  (b) In genuine cases such as cases arising due to medical reasons, the Dean of Academic Affairs may permit the student to take the qualifying examination in the makeup qualifying examination slot as per the calendar.  (c) The student must successfully clear the qualifying examination no later than 1.5 years from joining the programme. The admission will be terminated if the student fails to do so.  (d) Qualifying examinations will have two components, written and presentation. While equal weightage is suggested for these components, departments may choose non-zero weightages. Entire qualifying examination is to be completed over the qualifying examination window. The department shall set up an examination committee for conduct, grading and results of the qualifying examination. The committee may include members of the DSC.  H. Qualifying Examination (applicable for students admitted before Semester II, 2023-24 onwards)  (a) It is important to ensure the suitability of PhD students to carry out rigorous research work during their programme, and those not meeting the minimum expectations must be allowed to exit early. The qualifying examination is to be conducted within three semesters. Under exceptional circumstances, students may be permitted to appear for the qualifying examination afterwards but within two years with prior approval of the Dean, Academic Affairs. In rare cases, the candidate may be given a re-examination by allowing them 90 to 150 days of preparation. The examination will ensure the breadth and understanding of fundamentals (that is, course work before and during studies at IITGN) through a written examination and aptitude for research and appreciation of the area of research (through an oral examination).    (b) The student must successfully clear the Qualifying Examination (preferably within three semesters and no later than two years from joining in exceptional circumstances). The admission will be terminated if the student fails to do so.   (c) Qualifying examinations shall be conducted three times a year as per the qualifying examination calendar of the Institute. The students must appear for the qualifying examination during the qualifying examination window.  I. DSC Presentations and Proposal Defense Seminar (applicable for students admitted from Semester II, 2023-24 onwards) (a) PhD students who have cleared the qualifying examination must present their research work to their DSC every semester. The presentation must be conducted before 31st January for the July-December semester and 31st August for the January-April semester and the Summer term.  (b) All doctoral students must give a proposal defense seminar within six months of successfully clearing the qualifying examination as one of the DSC presentations. The proposal defense will include a written report and a presentation and shall be conducted and evaluated by the DSC. Upon failure, the student shall be required to present the proposal defense seminar again to the DSC after appropriate modifications.   J. DSC Presentations and Proposal Defense Seminar (applicable for students admitted before Semester II, 2023-24) (a) PhD students who have completed two semesters at the Institute must present their research work in a seminar to their DSC every semester. The seminar must be conducted before 31st January for the July-December semester and 31st August for the January-April semester and the Summer term.   Academic Affairs Advisory 23 (March 2024) ) Page 8  (b) Students will submit a self-assessment form before their DSC presentation. The supervisor and DSC members will evaluate the report. The DSC members must provide their comments on the prescribed form before submission to the academic office. Additionally, head of departments will submit a status report of the DSC presentations of all PhD students in their department to the academic office each semester.  (c) All doctoral students must give a proposal defense seminar within four months of successfully clearing the qualifying examination. The proposal defense will include both a written report and a presentation. Individual disciplines/faculty groups will be free to decide the specifics of the report and presentation depending upon the discipline's need and the student's proposed thesis project. This will, however, be conducted by the DSC, and the DSC may not clear the student until it is satisfied, requiring the student to go through the same more than once. DSC will communicate to the Academic Office once it clears the student's proposal defense.  K. Thesis Submission, Review and Defense  (a) Doctoral students will give a thesis seminar towards the end of their thesis work when they are almost ready for thesis submission. Through this seminar, the student is expected to take feedback on their research from a wider audience. The DSC will have a follow-up meeting with the student to form its recommendation about thesis submission. The student will fill up a form indicating that they have successfully completed all the coursework requirements. In case of failure of evaluation of the thesis seminar by the DSC, the DSC may ask the student to work further on the thesis.  (b) The expected time of thesis submission for all PhD students irrespective of their qualifying degree is four years or less (applicable for students admitted from Semester II, 2023-24). (c) Full-time PhD students who submit their thesis within their regular fellowship period may continue availing full fellowship till the date of their thesis defense, OR till the completion of their regular fellowship period of 5 years, whichever is earlier [Ref: Senate 2018.3.17]. [Note: This continuation of fellowship will be approved by the Dean, Academic Affairs, on the request of the student and recommendation of the PhD Thesis Supervisor. The student will be required to work from the campus and will also be required to perform TA duties similar to that of regular PhD students] (d) Once the DSC allows for thesis submission, the student will submit a synopsis of the thesis, and the advisor will provide the names of possible external reviewers – at least 10 from across the globe. Upon approval of the Chairman Senate, the thesis is sent to three external reviewers from the list suggested by the advisor or from outside that list. The reviewers will be contacted for their consent to review the thesis based on the content of the synopsis, and the process will be administered through the Academic Office. When the student submits the thesis, it will be sent to the three external reviewers approved by the Chairman, Senate. Once the feedback is received from all the reviewers, the student will prepare a detailed rebuttal to the reviewer's comments and suitably incorporate corrections in the thesis to the satisfaction of the advisor before proceeding to the final thesis defense.  (e) The students who have demonstrated adequate peer review material (e.g. published works, peer-reviewed conference presentations/proceedings, etc.) can be granted a waiver from the external review process by the Chairman, Senate based on the recommendations of the DSC and the Dean, Academic Affairs. In this case, the student can directly proceed to the process of final defense after submitting the thesis. (f) Once the student is ready for final defense, the supervisor will provide five names in addition to the DSC members, along with a request to form a Final Defense Committee (FDC) for the student. The Chairman Senate will form the FDC on the recommendation of the Dean of Academic Affairs Advisory 23 (March 2024) ) Page 9  Academic Affairs, which will typically have 5-6 persons, including the supervisor as the convener. Unless there is a reason, the DSC members will also be members of the FDC. In case of external review, the student is expected to submit the corrected thesis along with the rebuttal sheets to the FDC at least one week before the date of the final thesis defense. The final thesis defense must be conducted within six months from the date of receiving all the reviewer's comments unless permission has been sought from the Dean of Academic Affairs for an extension. In case of waiver from external review, the final thesis defense can be scheduled any time two weeks after the date of thesis submission. The final defense must be conducted within three months of thesis submission unless permission has been sought from the Dean of Academic Affairs for an extension. The purpose of the Final Defense is to allow the FDC to evaluate the research activity of the doctoral student. The overall assessment of the thesis will be marked by the FDC (in a Likert scale with categories ranging from outstanding, very good, good, average, and below average) along with its recommendation in a report to be submitted to the Academic office for final approval by the Chairman, Senate. The FDC can make any additional suggestions and require changes in the thesis before making a final recommendation.  (g) If the PhD defense of a student is conducted well within the expected period of submission, the student may be recommended for a postdoctoral position (till they complete five years) based on the evaluation of review comments on the thesis and recommendation submitted by the supervisor.  (h) Upon successful thesis defense and based on the FDC's recommendation, the candidate will submit the final thesis in the prescribed format to the Institute within 90 days of defense unless an extension has been granted by Dean, Academic Affairs. [Note: One printed copy of the thesis has to be submitted to the Library, and the soft copy has to be submitted to the Academic Office (email to phdthesis@iitgn.ac.in).] The student is not required to be in residency after the thesis submission for review. The recommendation of the final thesis submission will be submitted to the Chairman, Senate, for approval.  The series of events (along with the tentative time frame) from joining to the award of PhD degree has been summarized as a timeline and is shown on the next page.    Academic Affairs Advisory 23 (March 2024) ) Page 10  PhD Programme: Tentative Timeline  (Applicable for students admitted from Semester II, 2023-24 onwards)  Event Tentative Time Frame Responsible Person/Group Admission 1-3 months  before joining Head of Department,  AR (Academics),  Associate Dean (PG),  Chairman Senate Joining Date of  joining AR (Academics) Completion of Aarohan First two weeks  after joining Student, Associate Dean (PG) Allocation of supervisor Before the end of  first semester Head of Department,  AR (Academics) Associate Dean (PG) Semester registration Every semester Student,  Thesis Advisor/FA,  AR (Academics) Completion of physical education course requirements Within one semester  of joining Student Completion of independent project/seminar/teaching requirements Any time before the  thesis seminar Student Completion of coursework Any time before the  thesis seminar Student Formation of DSC Within six months  of joining Thesis Advisor Approval of DSC Within six months  of joining Dean (AA) Qualifying examination Within three semesters  of joining Student,  Head of Department DSC Seminar In January and August every year, after clearing qualifying examination DSC Proposal defense seminar Within six months of successfully clearing the qualifying examination Student, Thesis Advisor, DSC Enhancement of fellowship (If applicable) Whenever applicable  as per rules Supervisor, SAPEC Thesis seminar When the student is near completion of thesis work DSC Approval for thesis submission Within a week of a satisfactory thesis seminar DSC Recommendation for external evaluation waiver (If applicable) Within a week of a satisfactory thesis seminar DSC Submission of extended abstract/synopsis of the thesis (If applicable) Within two weeks of a satisfactory thesis seminar Student,  Thesis Advisor Recommendation of a panel of experts to the Chairman, Senate (If applicable) Within two weeks of a satisfactory thesis seminar Thesis Advisor,  Associate Dean (PG) Academic Affairs Advisory 23 (March 2024) ) Page 11  Selection of three external examiners (If applicable) Within three weeks of a satisfactory thesis seminar Chairman (Senate),  Associate Dean (PG) Thesis submission Within one month of a satisfactory thesis seminar Student Sending of synopsis to external examiners (If applicable) Within ten days of thesis submission Associate Dean (PG) Sending of the thesis to external examiners (If applicable) Upon acceptance of review invitation by external examiners Associate Dean (PG) Receipt of thesis evaluation reports (If applicable) Normally within one month of sending the thesis to reviewers Associate Dean (PG) Recommendation of a panel of members for the final defense committee (FDC) Within two weeks of receipt of the evaluation reports Thesis Advisor, Associate Dean (PG) Formation and approval of FDC Within two weeks of receipt of evaluation reports Chairman (Senate) Preparation of the updated thesis Within one month of receipt of the evaluation reports Student,  Thesis Advisor Sharing of the updated thesis along with rebuttal sheets to FDC One week before the date of the final defense Student,  Thesis Advisor Thesis defense § Any time after two weeks and within three months from submission of a thesis (If external waiver granted) § Within six months from the date of receipt of the reviewer's comments (If an external waiver is not granted) FDC Recommendation for award of PhD degree Within one week of thesis defense FDC Submission of the final thesis Within 90 days of defense Student Approval of award of PhD degree Within one week of thesis defense Chairman (Senate) Award of PhD degree Annual Convocation Senate,  Board of Governors     General Administration Advisory 12 (Version 2.0, December 201 7)                               Page 1 of 1 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
ADVISORY ON LEAVES   
 
 
Schedule E of the First Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar provide s details on the Leave Rules and 
Schedule C provides Conduct Rules applicable to employees of the Institute. In addition, 
some except ions have been ad opted by the Board of Governors of the Institute as covered 
in different advisories. T his advisory is meant to clarify the following :  
1. If an employee goes out of station for official work, he/ she is treated  as on du ty. In 
general , if TA /DA is charged to IITGN (including project account ), it will be treated as 
‘travel on duty’ .  
2. When a n employee goes out for a meeting where another organization pays for the 
travel, in that case the employee should seek Special Casual Leave . 
3. In some instance s, the Institute may provide part or full TA/DA and still treat the 
concerned person as on Special Casual Leave , (for instance, in case of faculty members 
participating in a conference overseas ). 
4. No employee shall leave station without prior permission of the concerned authority , 
even during leave or vacation/ holiday.  When leaving the station, an employee shall 
inform the address where he/ she would be available during the period of his/ her 
absence from station to  the Head of the Department / Section  to wh ich he is attached, or 
Director if he is himself the Head of the Department / Section ,. 
5. Delegation of work and adjustment of class shall be the responsibility of the employee 
seeking leave . The rescheduling of classes on account of faculty member going on l eave 
shoul d be within a reasonable limit.  Appropriate arrangement must be made by the staff/  
faculty travelling out of station as to who will handle his/her administrative/  committee 
responsibilities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 General Administration Advisory 06 (Version 3.0, April  201 7) Page 1 of 2  
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
REIMBURSEMENT OF COMMUNICATION CHARGES  
(As per Notification s dated 19 September 2016 and 25 April  2017 ) 
 
 
S. 
No. Employees  Ceiling Amount  
(per month)  
1. Faculty and Officers with GP of Rs . 10,000/ - or 
Consolidated Remuneration of Rs. 1,10,000/ - or more.  Rs. 1,400/ -  
per month  
2. Faculty and Officers with GP of Rs. 7,600/ - or 
Consolidated Remuneration of Rs. 80,000/ - or more.  Rs. 1,100/ -  
per month  
3. Faculty and Officers with GP of Rs . 5,400/ - or 
Consolidated Remuneration of Rs. 60,000/ - or more.  Rs. 800/ -  
per month  
The above reimbursement will be effected from the month of August, 2016, subject 
to the following conditions:  
a) The amount will be reimbursed with prescribed ceiling on submission of bill/ 
invoice and receipt of payment by the applicant, for land -line & mobile phones.  
b) For pre -paid payment, the least amount between receipt and bill shall be counted 
for the month of the corresponding date of the document.  
c) Expenses for use o f broad band or any form of internet use by faculty, if justified, 
may be charged to their PDA/CPDA or R&D projects.  
d) The reimbursement will be allowed for phones registered in the claimant’s name 
and at his/ her official/ residential address. There is no restriction in number or 
kind of connection.  
e) No telephone instrument or connection is to be provided by the Institute on this 
account.  
f) Reimbursement claims shall be submitted atleast once in every six months, and 
claims older than nine months should not be  included in any reimbursement 
application. No claim should be from an earlier date than the latest bill in the 
previous application.  
g) Employees mentioned above on any kind of long -leave, in or outside India, will 
not be entitled for reimbursement for the period of their leave.  
h) Maximum ceiling of reimbursement on communication charges for all faculty 
members carrying substantial responsibility of administration or committee work 
(e.g., Deans, Wardens, Placement Committee, etc)  will be double the amount of 
the entitlement in general norms. The same is also applicable to non -faculty 
officers that hold responsibilities requiring substantial communications. The 
Director will decide all such responsibilities from time to time for which this 
enhanced rate will be applicable.  General Administration Advisory 06 (Version 3.0, April  201 7) Page 2 of 2  
 i) The responsibilities that require even higher costs on communications, the 
Director may permit such faculty/ officers to charge their communication bills as 
per actuals.   
j) The faculty may also need substantial communication expenses for their 
research and professional activities and they are expected to charge those to 
their CPDA/PDA or research/ consulting grants.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Academic Affairs Advisory 27 (Version 2 .0, June 2022 )Page 1  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
GUIDELINES FOR M.TECH THESIS SUBMISSION & EVALUATION  
1. The student must complete the thesis (the work of writing it out) to the expectation of the 
supervisor and associated monitoring committee/group (if any, at the discipline  level).  
2. Template of a certificate is available at Annexure 1. Suitably edited version of this 
certificate is required to be signed by the supervisor and to be inserted righ t after the 
cover page.  There is flexibility in the format being used for the thesis; however, it is 
expected to follow generally expected level of quality in it. It should include 
acknowledgement, abstract, table of contents, list of tables, list of figur es, list of symbols, 
etc., before various chapters in a consistent  format.  
3. Once the thesis is ready, the student will fill up the form below and request the 
supervisor(s) to fill the second  form.  
• M.Tech Thesis Submission -Student (given at Annexure  2) 
• M.Tech Thesis Submission -Supervisor (the evaluation committee, with supervisor 
as convener, must have at least one person from the research area and at least 
one person from outside the discipline or research group) (given at Annexure  3) 
4. Student will submi t both the above forms to Academic Office. The student will also send 
a single PDF file of the thesis will be sent to mtechthesis@iitgn.ac.in  with copy to  
academics@iitgn.ac.in  at the same time, with the names of the supervisor(s) and other 
committee members mentioned in the  email.  At this point , you do not need to send this 
version to the library.  
5. The thesis will be forwarded by the Academic Office to the conc erned committee 
members within 24 hours for review. In case of any issues, the student and the supervisor 
will be informed  accordingly.  
6. Final defense of the thesis can be scheduled from 7th day onward from the date of 
submission. Final defense will be openly announced. The committee may choose to 
discuss further with the student in private after the presentation. The supervisor will then 
submit the examination report to the Academic Office for further processing and approval 
of thesis. The form is avail able at the following  link. 
 M.Tech Thesis Examination Report (given at Annexure 4)  
7. The student will prepare a final thesis after incorporating all the changes suggested by 
the defence committee members.  
8. The student will bring a hard copy of the final thes is along with a filled declaration form 
(Annexure 5) to the academic office.  
9. After the academic office endorses the successful defen se of the student, the student 
will submit the hard copy of his/her final M.Tech. thesis along with the endorsement 
(Annexu re 5) at the library.  
10. The student will email the soft copy of the final thesis to the library with a copy to his/her 
supervisor.  
11. The student is also required to submit the Non -Exclusive License Agreement Form 
(Annexure 6) signed by the student and superv isor. 
 Academic Affairs Advisory 27 (Version 2 .0, June 2022 )Page 2  ANNEXURE – 1 
 
CERTIFICATE  
 
It is certified  that the work  contained  in the thesis  titled  “XXX  XXXXXXX  XXXXX XX 
XXXXXXXXXXX XX XXX  XXXXXX” by <FULL NAME IN CAPITAL>  (<Roll Number> ), 
has been carried out under my supervision and that this work has not been submitted 
elsewhere for a degree.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<NAME OF SUPERVISOR>  
 
Assistant Professor  
 
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar  Academic Affairs Advisory 27 (Version 2 .0, June 2022 )Page 3  ANNEXURE – 2 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 
Name:   Roll No.:  Discipline:    
 
Title of Thesis  work:……………………………………………………………………………………..  
 
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
 
Date of  Joining  MTech:    Date of Thesis  Submission:     
 
Credits earned through  course  work:    Credits registered for thesis so  far:   
 
Similarity Index*: ____________  
 
Give details of any special situation during MTech, e.g., Semester drop, off -campus research work, 
internships, off -thesis proje ct work, etc : 
……………………………………………………………………………………………..……………  
…………..……………………………………………………………………………………………..…  
……………………..……………………………………………………………………………………  
Give the reasons of delay in thesis submission if MTech registration is more than 4 semesters and a 
summer:  
……… ……………………………………………………………………………………..……………  
…………..……………………………………………………………………………………………..…  
……………………..……………………………………………………………………………………  
Record of Publications / Papers presented / submitted  
(Attach separate sheet giving details/abstracts as appropriate ): 
 
 
Number of papers published/accepted:  Journals ........................  , Conferences ……………..  
Number of papers submitted (In review):  Journals ........................  , Conferences ……………..  
Number of presentations (unpublished):  Conferences  .................  , Workshop/meetings ……….  
 
Any other publications or special mentions: …………………………………………………………………  
In case of any publication is under preparation or it is in review, give the plan of completing the work 
towards submission of manuscript and/or handling the review comments:  
……………………………………………………………………………………………..……………  
…………..……………… ……………………………………………………………………………..…  
 
 
(Signature of Student)  
*A soft copy of Similarity Check Report may be sent to mtechthesis@iitgn.ac.inM.TECH THESIS SUBMISSION – STUDENT’S  FORM  
Academic Affairs Advisory 27 (Version 2 .0, June 2022 )Page 4  ANNEXURE – 3 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
Name:   Roll No.:  Discipline:    
 
Title of Thesis work: ………………………………………………………………………………......  
 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
Date of Thesis  Submission:     
What is your level of satisfaction with the quality of work ? 
□Very  high □High  □Moderate  □Low 
Likelihood of thesis work leading to a scholarly publication : 
□Very  high □High  □Moderate  □Low 
Has the student already published/submitted any manuscript based on thesis : 
□Yes □No 
If Yes, please provide  details:  
……………………………………………………………………………………………..……………  
…………..……………………………………………………………………………………………..…  
……………………..……………………………………………………………………………………  
………..………………………..  
If No, is additional work (by the same student or another one) likely to lead to a manuscript?  
 
……………………………………………………………………………………………..……………  
…………..……………………………………………………………………………………………..…  
……………………..……………………………………………………………………………………  
 
 
Supervisor:   
(Name  ) 
Thesis Evaluation Committee Members: (Name and their discipline)  
1. …………………………………………………………..  ………………………  
2. …………………………………………………………..  ……………………………  
3. …………………………………………………………..  ……………………………  
4. …………………………………………………………..  ……………………………  
5. …………………………………………………………..  ……………………………  M.TECH THESIS SUBMISSION – SUPERVISOR’S  FORM  
Academic Affairs Advisory 27 (Version 2 .0, June 2022 )Page 5  ANNEXURE – 4 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
Name of Student: Mr. /  Ms.    
 
Roll No.:   Discipline:   Date of  Joining    
 
Title of Thesis work:  …………………………………………………………………………………….  
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………..  
Date of  Thesis  submission:    Date and Time of  Examination:     
 
Committee’s Recommendation:  
□ Satisfactory thesis work and the  defense.  
□ Unsatisfactory work and needs further work. Suggested date of 2nd defense is  ……………..  
Additional Remarks:  
…………………………………………………………………………………………………..………  
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………..  
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………  
Thesis Evaluation Committee Members: (Name and their discipline)  
1. …………………………………………………………..  ……………………………  
 
2. ………………………………………………… ………..  ……………………………  
 
3. …………………………………………………………..  ……………………………  
 
4. …………………………………………………………..  ……………………………  
 
 
Forwarded to Academic Office. Corrections, if any, have been incorporated to the satisfaction of the 
committee.  
Date:  Thesis  Supervisor  
 
Considering that the student has completed all the requirements for graduation, he/she may be awarded the  
degree of Master of Technology in “ __________________________________________________”.  
 
    Date:          Academic Coordinator  
 
 
Date:   Dean, Academic  Affairs  
 
 
Chairman, Senate  M.TECH THESIS EXAMINATION REPORT  
Academic Affairs Advisory 27 (Version 2 .0, June 2022 )Page 6  ANNEXURE – 5 
 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 
THESIS  DEFENSE  REPORT  
Name of Student: Mr. / Ms. ______________________________________________ ____________ ____   
Roll No.: ____________ _____________________ __ Programme: _____________________________ 
Discipline : __________________________________  Date of Joining_______ __________ ______ ____   
Title of Thesis work: …………………………………………………………………………………………..  
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… ……
…………………………………………………… ……………………………………………………… . 
Date of Thesis Submission: _____________________ Date of Thesis Defense: _______________________  
I hereby declare that all the modifications suggested by the defense committee members have been incorporated in 
the final version of th e thesis which has been submitted in hardcopy at the academic office. A soft copy of the same 
version has been mailed to library.  
 
 
Date:                                                                                                                                   Signature of Stud ent 
 
 
 
All the modifications have been incorporated to the satisfaction of the committee  and this is the final version of the 
student’s thesis.  
 
 
Date:            Thesis Supervisor  
 
 
 
The student has successfully defended his/her thesis on ________________________  
 
 
 
 
Date:                            Academic Office  
 
  
Academic Affairs Advisory 27 (Version 2 .0, June 2022 )Page 7  ANNEXURE – 6 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 
ETD COLLECTION@IITGN DIGITAL REPOSITORY  
Electronic Theses & Dissertations Submission Form  
(A Non -Exclusive License Agreement Form )  
 
This form serves as the official record of PhD & Master’s thesis/dissertation submission to the IITGN Library. This 
form is not included in the dissertation or thesis.  
 
The information provided below should include the same information approved on the title page of your 
dissertation / thesis.  
 
Name of the Author (Scholar)  
                                                        Roll. No.   
Programme  
 
 PhD                      M.Sc.    
M.Tech.               M.A                                                     Year   
Discipline (Department)   
 
Email (Institute & Individual)   
 
Thesis Supervisor/Guide  
Co-Supervisor/Guide (if any)  
  
Thesis/Dissertation Title  
  
 
 
Keywords concerning subject 
of Thesis/Dissertation  
  
Date of Defense ( Viva -Voce)  
  
Date of Submission  
                                                      Format:  PDF:  
 
 
Agreement  
 
1. I certify that the version (both in print and electronic form) of my thesis I am submitting is the final one and is 
the one submitted and approved by my Supervisors/Guides and Advisory Committee, IITGN, upon the defense 
or viva-voce . 
 
2. I hereby certify that , if appropriate or where required, I have obtained and attached here to a written 
permission/statement from the owner(s) of each third party copyrighted matter to be included in my 
thesis/dissertation, allowing distribution as specified below.  
 
3. I have fulfilled the right of review or other obligations (as per the contract or agreement) required by the 
agency who has sponsored or supported this research work.  
 
4. I hereby grant to IITGN and its authorized units viz. Library the non -exclusive license to arch ive and make 
accessible, under the conditions specified in this form, my thesis, in whole or in part, in all forms of media, now 
or here after known.  
  
  
 Academic Affairs Advisory 27 (Version 2 .0, June 2022 )Page 8   
5. I retain all other ownership rights to the copyright of the thesis. I also retain the right to use in fu ture works 
(such as articles or books) all or part of this thesis.  
 
6. I agree with Library making available bibliographic details and abstracts immediately on submitting the 
thesis/dissertation through the Library Catalogue and Digital Repository.  
 
Condition s 
 
For each question, you may tick (√) against one of the following options.  
 
1. Thesis/Dissertation content to be released:  
a. Entire thesis including bibliographic details and abstract 
(default)  
b. Specific chapters (give the list of chapters), in addition to 
biblio graphic details and abstract.  
 
c. Only bibliographic details and abstracts to be hosted on 
IITGN Server/Digital Repository.  
 
 Yes:  
 
Yes: 
   
Yes:    
2. Hosting site  
a. IITGN Server/Digital Repository only  
b. Fine with submitting to Consortia/Library networks of which 
the library is a member.  
 Yes:              
 
Yes:              
3. Time for embargo after which the release specified at Sr.1 and  
Sr. 2 happens.  
 
1. Immediately on completing due process by the library  
2. One Year  
3. Two Years  
4. Any Other Period (please specify)  
  
 
 
Yes:              
Yes:   
Yes: 
Yes: 
 
  
 
 
Declaration  
 
I certify that the copy of Thesis/Dissertation submitted to the IITGN E -Thesis & Dissertation System (Print and 
Digital Version)/Digital Repository is an exact copy of the version approved & accepted by the office of the Dean, 
Academic Affairs, IITGN for awarding the degree.  
 
 
Name & Signature of the Scholar/Student    
 
 
Endorsed  by                                                        Accepted/Received by Library  
 
 
Name & Signature of the Supervisor(s)                                                   Name & Signature of Library Staff     
 
 
Place:  
Date:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Research and Development Advisory 17 (Version 1.0, September 2022 )                          Page 1 of 2 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
IITGN FOCUS SCHOOL  
(As approved by the BoG in its 34th meeting held on 28 April 2022) 
 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 34th meeting held on 28 April 2022 
approved the IITGN Focus School at IIT Gandhinagar . This Focus School is a 
concept and various such programmes will be offered with different names.  
 
1. Background : IITGN Focus School at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) 
Gandhinagar  will be operated by IITGN -X. The program is mainly intended to 
train students graduating from various institutes in new and emerging areas and 
improve their professional preparedness. Some programs under this initiative 
may also be designed specifically for working professionals and school children.  
2. Eligibility:  
(a) Some programs would primarily be designed for students pursuing their 
undergraduate studies. Students who are in the final  year of their 
undergraduate degree are eligible to join such programs. These may also be 
open to working professionals with an undergraduate degree.  
(b) Some programs may be designed for working professionals with a focus on 
knowledge enhancement in a specific area like public health engineering, 
where the students may also be permitted to attend.  
(c) Some programs may be design ed for other student groups (including high 
school students, diploma students etc.) with their own eligibility criteria and 
duration as applicable to their objectives. The process of approval will remain 
the same.  
3. Course Structure:  
A successful candidate is required to clear a minimum of 12 credits through 
courses, with each course generally having 1 to 4 credits. Typically, the courses 
may be covered over 10 to 12 weeks for 12 credit programs and could be spread 
over a year for programs with 20 credits or  more. The courses will be generally 
conducted online, covering the following three broad areas:   
● Foundational courses : Review of basics, which are relevant to the technology 
area of the program (minimum 2 credits)  
● Core courses : Content related to new technology, which are usually not part 
of a regular undergraduate program (minimum 6 credits)  
● Leadership Skills courses : Courses in communication, teamwork, and 
initiative (1 to 4 credits)  
The percentage of each of the above -mentioned components needs to b e 
designed and approved separately before the start of a program.  
 
 Research and Development Advisory 17 (Version 1.0, September 2022 )                          Page 2 of 2 
 4. Selection Process:  
Each program will be designed and approved separately, keeping in mind the 
relevance of the program. The selection process may include a written test and/or 
interview.  
5. Assessment and Qualification:   
● The program will be designed to have a continuous rigoro us evaluation of the 
performance of the candidate.  
● All courses will have Pass/Fail grade.  
● Candidates who are not clearing the required credits during the duration of the 
focus school may be provided one additional opportunity to clear the program 
after th e end of the program, within a reasonable time as approved at the time 
of initiation of the focus school.  
6. Operational Aspects   
● The programs will be offered by IITGN -X by engaging the interested faculty 
members from the institute and outside.  
● The honorarium and/or coordination fees to the resource persons would be 
paid as per the norms of IITGN -X. The coordinators can invite resource 
persons (instructors and teaching associates) for conducting the courses or 
sessions or for assisting in the same.  
● The fees for each Focus School may be proposed by IITGN -X at the time of 
offering it for approval by the Director.  
● The courses offered by the institute in other programs may be extended to 
Focus School students with prior permission on a case -to-case basis.  
● While designing the program, the proposals should account for the target 
audience and the interest group.   
Faculty Affairs Advisory 16 (Version 3.0, January  2014 )                                                   Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR OPERATION OF RAMANUJA N FELLOWSHIPS AND 
OTHER SIMILAR FELLOWSHIPS  
 
(As a pproved by Board of Governors in its eighth meeting held on 3rd December 2012)  
 
Different Departments/Ministries of Government of I ndia (such as Department of Science 
and Technology, Department of Biotechnology, etc) have a number of schemes for awarding 
Fellowships to faculty and potential -faculty candidates with excellent credentials. Several 
benefits accrue when faculty members app ly and seek such opportunities: a) It enables 
faculty to compete which builds up their confidence and in case of success, it adds to their 
resume, b) a number of such Fellowships being awarded to our faculty will add to prestige of 
the Institute, and c) In stitute may save some money in the salary head. Hence, it is important 
for the Institute to create a conducive environment that encourages recipients of such 
Fellowships and ensures that they do not suffer any financial disadvantages by accepting 
such a fe llowship.  
 
Some of the Fellowships (such as J C Bose Fellowship) provide a “top -up” amount to the 
faculty members, over and above the regular salary that one continues to draw from his/her 
parent institution. Such Fellowships will be managed as such. In c ase someone is receiving 
a monthly honorarium through a Chair or an Excellence -in-Research Fellowship of the 
Institute, the same will continue.  
 
Some of th e Fellowships (such as Ramanuja n Fellowship) provide a monthly honorarium 
comparable to the entry -level faculty salary. In case of such a Fellowship, two scenarios may 
arise:  
1. The person is not employed by the Institute as faculty member but IITGN agrees to 
host him/ her under the Fellowship. In that case, all the conditions of the Fellowship 
will be appl ied as such and IITGN will only provide the support for research and 
professional activities as appropriate.  
2. The person is already a faculty member of the Institute or subsequently gets selected 
as a faculty member of the Institute. In such a case, the per son will be treated as on 
Institute rolls, and the financial norms will be as per the following:  
a. If the Fellowship amount is lower than the IITGN salary (Basic Pay + Grade 
Pay + DA), the person will receive Fellowship as per prescribed rate, plus 
IITGN wil l pay a monthly honorarium equal to the difference of the two. If 
Fellowship is higher, the person will draw only the Fellowship.  
b. In addition, IITGN will pay all allowances and fringe benefits applicable to 
faculty members such as  HRA, Transport Allowance , Children’s Education 
Allowance, LTC, Contribution to New Pension Scheme, Medical 
Reimbursement, Communication charges, Professional Development 
Allowance, etc, as per his/ her salary and entitlement at IITGN.  
c. If the Fellowship has a provision of HRA, II TGN will not pay HRA. However, if 
the HRA provided by the Fellowship is lower than the HRA entitlement as per 
IITGN norms, the difference will be added as a monthly honorarium from 
IITGN.  
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR
STUDENT AFFAIRS
NORMS FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCIAL SUPPORT TO IITGN STUDENTS
(As approved by the BoG in its 13thMeeting held on14 March 2014 and revised in June 2019)
IITGNbelievesthatﬁnancialconstraintsshouldnotbecomeobstaclesintheacademicpursuitofanystudent.Wehaveextremelyliberalﬁnancialaidandscholarshipprogramstoensurethatnostudentfeelsdisadvantagedduetotheirﬁnancialsituation.InspiteofvariousconcurrentschemesandinitiativessuchasTuitionFeeWaiver,donorscholarshipsetc,therearecasesinwhichstudentsareinneedofadditionalﬁnancialsupport.Hence,theinstituteprovidesﬁnancialsupportinvariousformsasoutlinedbelowtodeservingstudentsfortheirneedstowardsexpendituressuchastuitionfee,hostelandmessfee,books,computer,pocketexpenses,medicalemergencies(beyondwhatiscoveredbyinsurance),socialandcultural activities, internships and educational tours, etc.
The terms for interest-free loans and ﬁnancial grants are as below:
1. Short-Term Loans
Short-termloanswillbeprovidedtodeservingstudentswithdemonstratedneedsfortheabove-statedpurposesfromStudentBenevolentFund.Thestudentmayrepaytheloanusingtheirstipend,personalsourcesorearningsthroughtheoCEOprogram.Short-termloansaretoberepaidfullybythestudentbeforetheirgraduationandtherepaymenttermsshallbebasedondiscussionswith the student.
2. Long-Term Loans
Long-termloanswillbeprovidedtodeservingstudentswithdemonstratedneedsfortheabovestatepurposesfromStudentBenevolentFund.Thestudentsshallbeprovidedinterest-freeloanswithrepaymentdatesextendinguptoamaximumof36monthsfromtheirrespectivedatesofgraduation.TherepaymentcanbemadeaftergraduationonEMI/Quarterly/Half-yearlybasisandthe repayment terms shall be worked out on a  case-by-case basis in consultation wi th the student.
3. Financial Grants
Financialgrantswillbeprovidedtodeservingstudentswithdemonstratedneedsfortheabove-statedpurposesfromStudentBenevolentFund.Unliketheshort-termandlong-termloans,theﬁnancialsupportsreceivedfromsuchgrantsarenotdeemedtoberepaidbythebeneﬁciarystudents.
StudentsmayapproachtheOﬃceoftheDean,StudentAﬀairsforﬁnancialassistanceduringanypointoftimeinthecourseoftheiracademicjourneyattheinstitute,however,theamountandcategoryoftheﬁnancialassistance(includingpossiblyacombinationofmorethanoneoftheoptionsmentionedabove)shallbedecidedonacase-by-casebasisandallsuchrequestsshallbeapprovedbyDirectorontherecommendation of Dean (SA)/Associate Dean (SD).
Student Affairs Advisory 03 (January 2022)Page 1Faculty Affairs Advisory 0 2 (Version 2.0, September  2018)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
WHAT ARE WE LOOKING FOR IN A FACULTY CANDIDATE?  
 
1. Qualifications and Academic Record  
a. Degrees and Universities attended. Time taken to attain degrees  
b. Consistency in academic record : transcripts for various degrees  
c. Course work done  
d. Strong fundamentals in the subject  
e. Referee reports and credentials of referees  
f. Culture and environment of candidate’s past affiliations  
 
2. Research and Development Work 
a. Quality and number of research papers  in journals, conferences, etc.  
b. Contribution of the candidate in publication, if publication is multi -authored.  
c. Potential  of the candidate to carry out research activities independently  
d. Areas and relevance of the research work including breadth and depth of the 
area.  
e. Originality in research activities.  
f. Patents filed and granted, with details  
g. Quality of research proposal (to  be carried out at IITGN) submitted along with the 
faculty application.  
h. Feasibility of t he Institute  to provide research facilities (e.g., animal facility, 
agricultural facility, clean  room , etc.). 
 
3. Teaching Abilities  
a. Passion for teaching  
b. Capability to teach a range of courses  
c. Experience in teaching if any: Details of evaluation in teaching, if available  
d. Evidence of being an outstanding teacher?  
 Ability of the candidate to teach  UG students and address their queries 
effectively  
 Effective interaction with students  
 Good oral and written communication skills  
 
4. Personality Attributes  
a. Motivation and aspiration to make an impact  
b. Leadership, initiative, attitude, enthusiasm and energetic participation  
c. Participation in extra and co -curricular activities  
d. Ability to work in a team  
e. Capability to contribute to Institute activities  
 
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 02  (A) (March 2020)  Page 1 
  
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
STUDENT AFFAIRS  
DONOR SCHOLARSHIPS AT IITGN  
 
These donor scholarships have been  instituted by the well-wishers  and alumni of IIT Gandhinagar to provide financial support to IITGN students. Brief details 
of the available donor scholarship s along with the purpose and eligibility criteria are mentioned  below.  These scholarships are processed through ‘Senate 
Scholarships and Prizes Committee’ (SSPC). For additional information, the Student Affairs office may be contacted.  
 
Sl.
No Name and Number of 
Scholarships  Amount of 
Scholarship 
per Year  Instituted by   
Purp ose  
Eligibility  Remarks  
1  
Erach and Mehroo Mehta 
Merit Scholarship  
 Rs. 2 Lakh  Mr. Ruyintan 
(Ron) E. Mehta  To award scholarships to t op 
five students admitted to the 
BTech program at IITGN and 
holding a JEE Advanced rank of 
1000 or better or having 
represented India in any 
recognized international 
Olympiad.   
JEE Advanced 
rank of 1000 or 
better for First 
year UG students   
Open to first year UG 
students (Renewed every 
year subject to CPI of 8.0)  
2 Class of 2016 Scholarship 
- 02 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  2016 Graduates 
of IITGN  
To support internships 
(international or domestic), 
special projects and 
opportunities, financial needs 
etc. CPI 6.5  or above  Open to all UG students.  
3 Class of 2015 Scholarship 
- 02 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  2015 Graduates 
of IITGN  Open to all UG students.  
4 Mahabir Prasad Sultania 
Scholarship - 01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Deepak 
Sultania  Open to all UG students.  
5 Durga Devi Sultania 
Scholarship - 01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Deepak 
Sultania  Open to all UG students.  Student Affairs Advisory 02  (A) (March 2020)  Page 2 
 Sl.
No Name and Number of 
Scholarships  Amount of 
Scholarship 
per Year  Instituted by   
Purp ose  
Eligibility  Remarks  
6 Amalthea Scholarship  
(Multiple Scholarships)  Up to  
Rs. 1 Lakh  Amalthea, IITGN  Open to all UG students.  
7 Lalita J Shah & Jayantilal 
B Shah Scholarship - 01 
per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Rajendra 
Shah  Open to all UG students.  
8 P.K. Kelkar Scholarship - 
01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Prof R Sharan  
To support internships 
(international or domestic), 
special projects and 
opportunities, financial needs 
etc. CPI 6.5  or above  
 
 
 Open to all UG students.  
9 SC Mehrotra's Scholarship 
- 01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Shri  SC 
Mehrotra  Open to all UG students. 
Preference will be given to 
Civil Engineering students.  
10 Chandrkant & Patricia 
Desai Scholarship - 01 per 
year Rs. 1 Lakh  Dr. Chandrakant 
S Desai  Open to all UG students.  
11 Prof. KV Venkatesha 
Murthy Scholarship - 01 
per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mrs. Usha 
Murthy  Open to all UG students.  
12 Dr. JL Nayyar Scholarship 
- 01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Mohinder L 
Nayyar  Open to all UG students.  
13 Santosh Rani Tandon 
Scholarship - 01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Prof.  Mahesh 
Tandon  Open to all UG students. 
Preference will be given to a 
girl student interested in 
Structural Engineering. 
Else, another student of 
Civil Engineering may be 
awarded the scholarship.  
14 Mrs. Sita Jha Memorial 
Scholarship - 01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Nirmal Jha  Open to all UG students. 
Preference will be given to a 
girl student.  Student Affairs Advisory 02  (A) (March 2020)  Page 3 
 Sl.
No Name and Number of 
Scholarships  Amount of 
Scholarship 
per Year  Instituted by   
Purp ose  
Eligibility  Remarks  
15 Bipin and Rekha Shah 
Scholarship - 02 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Bipin Shah  Open to all UG students.  
16 Bhai Suresh Mohan Mittal 
Scholarship - 01 per year Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Sudhir 
Mohan Mittal  Open to all UG students. 
Preference will be given to 
needy students.  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To support internships 
(international or domestic), 
special projects and 
opportunities, financial needs 
etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
17 Bhai Krishna Chandra 
Mittal Scholarship - 01 per 
year Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Sudhir 
Mohan Mittal  
CPI 6.5  or above  
 
 
 
 
 Open to all UG students. 
Preference will be given to 
needy students.  
18 Prof. S P Sukhatme 
Scholarship - 01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Prof. S P 
Sukhatme  Open to all UG students.  
19 Ajodyabai Gulabchandji 
Randad Scholarship - 01 
per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Akshay 
Randad  Open to all UG students.  
20 Shri Arjun Raj Mehta 
Scholarship - 01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Rounak 
Mehta  Open to all UG students.  
21 Vimala Srinivas 
Scholarship - 01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Sai 
Chowdary  Open to all UG students.  
22 Vinay Gupta Scholarship - 
01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Luv Gupta  Open to all UG students.  
23 Ashok Jain Scholarship - 
01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Sarthak Jain  Open to all UG students.  Student Affairs Advisory 02  (A) (March 2020)  Page 4 
 Sl.
No Name and Number of 
Scholarships  Amount of 
Scholarship 
per Year  Instituted by   
Purp ose  
Eligibility  Remarks  
24 Class of 2013 Scholarship 
- 02 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  2013 Graduates 
of IITGN   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To support internships 
(international or domestic), 
special projects and 
opportunities, financial needs 
etc. 
 Open to all UG students.  
25 Professor Nitish Thakor 
Scholarship – 01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Prof. Nitish 
Thakor  Open to all UG students.  
26 Seema Jain Scholarship – 
01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Prof. Sudhir K. 
Jain 
CPI 6.5  or above  
 Open to all UG students.  
27 N K Jain Scholarship – 01 
per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Prof. Sudhir K. 
Jain Open to all UG students.  
28 Daya Shanker & 
Shakuntala Scholarship – 
01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Akash 
Keshav Singh  Open to all UG students.  
29 Shri Onkarprasad Tandon 
Scholarship – 01 per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. Akhilesh 
Gotmare  Open to all UG students.  
30 Satyaram Scholarship - 11 
per year  Rs. 1 Lakh  Mr. VVS Laxman 
(Through NGO 
Yuva 
Unstoppable)   
 
To award Merit Cum Means 
Scholarship for UG Students  CPI 6.5  or above  
and annual 
parental income 
of Rs. 3 Lakhs  Open to first year  UG 
students.  (Renewed every 
year subject to CPI of 6.5)  
(Preference will be given to 
support financially weaker 
class of students).  
31 Kandoi -Dairkee -Gaurav 
Scholarship - 01 per year  Rs. 50,000/ -  Mr Abhishek 
Kandoi  
Mr. Maisum Ali 
Dairkee  
Mr. Anchit 
Gaurav  
(Pioneer Batch 
Alumni )  
To award Merit Cum Means 
Scholarship for UG students   
CPI 6.0  or above  
and annual 
parental income 
of Rs. 8 Lakhs   
Open to Second /third year 
UG students displaying all -
round growth with active 
involvement in non -
academic activities.  Student Affairs Advisory 02  (A) (March 2020)  Page 5 
 Sl.
No Name and Number of 
Scholarships  Amount of 
Scholarship 
per Year  Instituted by   
Purp ose  
Eligibility  Remarks  
32 Prof. M.H. Divekar 
Scholarship - 01 per year  Rs. 40,000/ - Mrs. Mugdha 
Mukund Divekar   
To award Merit Cum Means 
Scholarship for  third year 
chemical engineering students  Highest 
grade /CPI in 
Chemical 
Engineering at the 
end of third year.  Open to third year Chemical 
Engineering Undergraduate 
students  
33 Niteen P Sant Scholarship 
- 01 per year  Rs. 20,000/ -  Mr. Gaurav N 
Sant  
To award merit cum means 
scholarship for Civil and 
Material Science Engineering 
Students.   
CPI 6.5  or above  
and annual 
parental income 
of Rs. 4.5 Lakhs  Open to second year UG 
students  
34 Sri Temasek@IIT 
Gandhinagar Scholarship - 
01 per year  Rs. 20,000/ - Prof Murali 
Damodaran   
To award Merit Cum Means  
Scholarship for UG students   
CPI 6.5  or above  Open to second, third and 
fourth  year UG students.  
35 Professor DV Pai 
Scholarship - 01 per year  Rs. 25,000/ - Professor DV Pai   
To award Merit Cum Means 
Scholarship for Msc, 
Mathematics students  CPI 7.0 or above  
and annual 
parental Income 
of Rs. 8.0 Lakh  Open to MSc , Mathematics  
Students . 
 
For further details of  above mentioned  donor scholarships, p lease click here . Faculty Affairs Advisory 07 (Version 1.0, July  201 2) Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
SCHOLARS -IN-RESIDENCE PROGRAMME  
 
(As approved by t he Board of Governors in its 7th meeting held on 23rd June 2 012) 
 
IIT Gandhinagar would like to establish a Scholars -in-Residence Scheme which will lead to yet 
another type of scholarly activity at the Institute. Under this scheme, personnel with excellent / 
outstanding track record as Teachers/ Researchers/Scholars will be invited to spend varying 
periods [from one month to a year] at IIT Gandhinagar, with a vie w to provide an ambience which 
promotes the spirit of inquiry, research and scholarship which the students, staff and faculty can 
partake.  
 
Eminent scholars from India or aboard, hosted under this scheme, could utilize the period in 
residence to  
 prepare/co mplete manuscripts of books/monographs  
 seed/nucleate research ideas, and, develop them further in collaboration with IITGn faculty  
 prepare collaborative research proposals with IITGn faculty as partners  
 conduct workshops/plan international conferences  
 help develop curricula for courses/programmes in emerging areas.  
 
Scholars -in-Residence will be expected to interact with the faculty and students of IITGn  – in a 
manner consistent with the key objectives and activities targeted for the tenure, and share their work 
in progress at Institutional Seminars/public lectures. They would be expected to acknowledge the 
support extended by IITGn in their dissemination  endeavours – invited 
lecturers/reports/publications/research proposals.  
Scholars -in-Residence would be provided with  
 to and fro air fare by economy class as per Institutional norms  
 rent free semi -furnished accommodation for the tenure  
 OPD facilities available to faculty of IITGn  
 office space and access to Library facilities, and  
 an honorarium  
 
Selection of Scholars under this scheme would be carrie d out by the Standing Committee on faculty 
affairs which will examine nominations and pro posals in the light of  
 the significance and potential impact of the visitor  
 the clarity of objectives and schedule of activities  
 the likely output, and plans for dissemination of the results  
 
The Standing Committee will also decide on the honorarium to be  offered depending on expected 
involvement. At the present time, it is expected to range from Rs. 15,000 to Rs. 30,000 per week. 
However, the range of honorarium may be revised from time to time by the Standing Committee. The 
Standing Committee may also in  exceptional cases approve proposals where the visitor can spend Faculty Affairs Advisory 07 (Version 1.0, July  201 2) Page 2 
 less than one month at IITGN. The Committee may also choose to designate a visitor as 
“Distinguished Scholar -in-Residence” . 
 
The scheme will be reviewed after five years operating experience.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 0 5(Version 1.0, July 2012)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHONOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
AVAILABILITY OF SOFT ADVANCE TO NEW FACULTY  
 
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 4th meeting held on 3rd September 2011 ) 
 
As per Govt.  of India norms, a regular employee of the Institute may avail of a number of loans 
from the Institute: for house building, conveyance, and the like. Usually, such loans have a long 
repayment period and the interest is not compounded, turning these into ra ther soft loans. Many 
of our new faculty colleagues are not eligible for these loans because (a) those without three 
year experience must remain on contract for three years as Assistant Professor (Contract), and 
(b) many are recruited on an initial contrac t of two years through the Standing Committee.  
 
It was therefore decided that an interest -free soft advance of Rs 2 lakhs be made available to 
the new faculty members. The amount will be recovered from salary over a period of 20 months, 
or for the remainin g period of contract (in case of faculty on contract), whichever happens to be 
first. This advance is meant to help the new faculty members to comfortably incur initial 
establishment expenditures in setting up the house and in purchase of conveyance.  
 Guideline for conducting a Ph.D. thesis defense online 
In view of the COVID-19 situation, a framework for defending a Ph.D. thesis remotely is proposed as 
below. It is to be emphasized at the outset that this is a temporary measure being put in place until 
in-person defense becomes feasible.   
Scheduling the defense: 
1. After the Final Defense Committee (FDC) / Oral Board gets approved, the student needs to 
share (via email/Google drive, etc.) the revised version of the thesis and his/her replies to the 
reviewers’ comments to all members of the FDC / Oral Board (cc: phdthesis@iitgn.ac.in ). 
2. The FDC / Oral Board members are expected to go through the thesis and the students’ 
responses to the reviewers’ comments. Any issues on this front may be flagged to the 
Associate Dean (PG) at least 3 days  before the defense.  
3. The supervisor should make a formal announcement of the defense to all faculty and all 
Ph.D. students of the institute, all FDC / Oral Board members, and other PG students of the 
discipline (cc: academics@iitgn.ac.in ). The link for participating in the defense is to be 
shared in the announcement email. 
4. There should be a gap of at least 10 days  between the date of the formal announcement and 
the date of the defense.  
 
During the defense: 
1. It is to be ensured that there are at least 10 participants in the online defense (other than the 
student defending and FDC members). 
2. The entire defense (including Q/A session and discussion with the candidate) is to be 
recorded and archived in the library. Any discussions between FDC members in the absence 
of the student also need to be recorded and archived.  
 
3. A staff colleague designated by the academic office will be available to provide technical 
support during the defense (including recording of the defense and post-defense 
discussions). 
 
4. If a committee member’s remote connection fails and they are not able to reconnect, a 
separate interaction session with that member may be scheduled at a later time. If such a 
situation arises, the date and time of the meeting must be intimated to the Associate Dean 
(PG). Any such additional sessions are also to be recorded and archived.  
 
5. This final defense report may be prepared by the supervisor in consultation with the other 
FDC members. All FDC members will need to provide their physical / email endorsement of 
this report. Post-defense procedures remain the same as an in-person defense.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 20 (Version 6.0, June  2023 )                                                Page 1 of 2 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
ENDOWED FACULTY CHAIRS   
(Updated as per BoG approvals upto 37th meeting held on 13 May 2023 ) 
 
Background and Context:  
The Board in its first meeting held on December 18, 2009 had approved the policy for 
supporting excellence by faculty and students, including through faculty chairs and research 
fellowships. Over the years, the Institute has been offering chairs and research fellowships 
to new faculty members on a case -by-case basis using donor funds, for a period of first three 
years (to be reviewed every year based on performance). These have been effective means 
for recruitment of outstanding faculty to the Institute and the Institute must continue the 
same. Due to limitation of funds, the Institute had not extended the chairs and research 
fellowships to faculty members beyond the first three years.  
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 21st meeting held on 17 March 2017 , in its 28th 
meeting held on 02 January 2020 , in its 29th meeting held on 20 August 2020 , in its 30th meeting 
held on 17 December 2020 , in its 31st meeting held on 23 April 2021 , in its 32nd meeting held on 
20 August 2021  and in its 37th meeting held on 13 May 2023 decided to institute following named 
chairs to be funded through  donations . 
 
(1) Jasubhai Memorial Chair  
(2) B. S. Gelot Chair  
(3) TEOCO Chair   
(4) N Rama Rao Chair  
(5) Jibaben Patel  Chair in the area of Artificial Intelligence  
(6) Jibaben Patel Chair open to all disciplines  
(7) Kankuben Bakshirambhai Gelot Chair for a woman faculty  
(8) Dr Dinesh O Shah Chair  
(9) Smt. Meera and Prof. Girish K. Sharma Chair  
(10) Dr. Vilas Mujumdar Chair  
(11) Smt. Amba and Sri V. S. Sastry Chair  
(12) Vikram Sarabhai Chair  
(13) Pandya -Shivpuri Chair in Population Dynamics  
(14) BIS Standardization Chair  
 
Selection Criteria:  
The expectations of the Institute from its faculty, as laid out in the offer letter, are divided into 
four main categories: (a) teaching (b) research (c) service and  (d) personal and interpersonal 
skills. It is envisaged that all of these categories will form the basis for select ion for the 
faculty chair positions. A decent teaching record and good personal and interpersonal skills 
are minimum, non -negotiable requirements to be considered. In addition, excellence in both 
research and service is expected from a successful candidate  for a faculty chair position.  
 
Teaching:  The successful candidate must have a decent teaching record in terms of range 
of courses, class sizes, student feedback, student mentoring and guidance, etc. Currently, 
there is a general level of satisfaction wit h teaching in the Institute and most faculty 
members are doing well on this front.  
 
Research : With its aspiration to be a top research university, the Institute expects the 
successful candidate for the chair professorship to have an excellent research profile as 
evidenced through publications, guidance of doctoral students and success in attracti ng 
sponsored research funds. Further, the impact that his/her research creates (in the context 
of his/her area of work) will be of greater value than numbers alone. For example, in some 
cases the quality of publications and citations may be more critical, while in other cases the 
impact on industry and/or society may be more valued. Further, research performed at IIT 
Gandhinagar (as against research performed prior to joining IITGN or by taking leave from 
IITGN) will be given higher weightage during the eva luation.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 20 (Version 6.0, June  2023 )                                                Page 2 of 2 
  
Service to the Institute : IITGN values both service to the Institute and service to the 
profession. Shared governance is one of the critical elements that determine success of top 
universities around the world, and IITGN also aspires for the sam e. This is far more critical 
for a new institute than for larger and more established institutes. In fact, the long -term 
success of the IITGN will depend on how effectively the career faculty members start to take 
over leadership responsibilities. Therefor e, a successful candidate for the chair position is 
expected to have spent time vigorously and effectively participating in Institute administration 
and committees.  
 
Personal and Interpersonal Skills:  It is expected that the successful candidate will have 
good personal and interpersonal skills as laid out in the expectations document.   
 
Selection Process:  
Nominations will be invited for the chair positions from the faculty, including self -nominations. 
The nominated candidates will be requested to give thei r consent and provide a detailed 
dossier on their work. A selection committee will evaluate the dossiers and make 
recommendations for approval of the Chairman, Board of Governors.  
 
The selection committee will consist of the Director as the Chair, one member from all 
current and past Senate nominees to the IITGN Board of Governors, and an additional two 
to four members drawn from a) all past and present Directors of IITs/IISc/IISERs,  b) current 
and former Council nominees on the IITGN Board of Governors, and c) all past and present 
Visitor’s Nominees for IITGN.  
 
Whenever an incumbent completes the Chair tenure, his/her performance be presented 
before the Selection Committee, which ma y recommend to (a) renew the Chair position for 
another term to the incumbent, or (b) advertise the position to faculty members in the 
Institute, and the incumbent will have an option to be considered against the advertisement.  
 
Other Details:  
a) The incumben t should have spent at least three years at the institute, and may be 
Professor, Associate Professor or Assistant Professor.  
b) The chair position will be offered for five years initially and be renewed for another five 
years after review by the selection com mittee. It can be renewed any number of times by 
the same process at the end of each term. The incumbent will continue to hold the Chair 
if there is a delay in holding the selection committee process .  
c) The incumbent will receive an honorarium in the range of Rs. 50,000/ - to Rs.1,00,000/ - 
per month and half of it will be credited to his/her Professional Development Account 
(PDA). The incumbent may ask for additional part or even the full amount of the 
honorarium to go to his/her PDA.  
d) The chair p rofessor will be expected to send an annual report to the donor on his/her 
activities in a format prescribed by the Institute from time to time. The report shall be sent 
through the official channels of the Institute. Failure to submit such a report in a t imely 
manner may lead to discontinuation of the award of Chair.  
e) The Institute will finalize a suitable title for such Chairs in consultation with the concerned 
donors. The incumbent will be expected to mention this title in his/her signature, visiting 
cards, publications, etc.   
Academic Affairs Advisory 09 (Version 1.0, July 2012)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR LATE REGISTRATION OF STUDENTS  
 
(Senate in its 9th Meeting held on 17th November 2011  approved the following)  
 
It is imperative for most of the students to complete their registration requirements on the 
prescribed date of registration by the Senate and start attending classes from the first day. 
This provides sufficient time for the students to understand the requirements in different 
courses and adjust their registered courses within stipulated add/d rop period. It also 
facilitates the flexibility of any adjustments in the Time Table to help the students with time 
clashes in courses of their interest. The facility of late registration, however, permits a 
student with genuine, and often unavoidable, rea sons to complete this requirement at a later 
date within a week and start attending classes fr om that time onwards.  
 
However, a student registering late loses right to ask for any relaxation/help against any time 
clash besides missing important discussions  at the beginning of courses. In the interest of 
the students in general, the late registrations are strongly discouraged except in a few cases 
when it is genuinely needed due to unavoidable circumstances.  
 
The following penalties are thus proposed to disc ourage casual late registrations:  
 
a) A student registering within first THREE days of classes after the date of (normal) 
registration will pay a penalty of Rs 5,000/ - 
b) A student registering after THREE days of classes, as mentioned in point (a) above, 
will pay a penalty of Rs10,000/ - 
c) Registration is not permitted after the last date of late registration  
d) If a student seeks prior permission to register late on valid grounds, DOAA may 
reduce/waive the payment of late registration penalty.  
e) The amount collected t hrough the penalty can be utilized in general to help the 
students needing temporary financial support or other similar student activities.  
 
The proposed penalties for late registration are also made keeping in mind the need to know 
expected registration s trengths in different courses in order to take corrective measures in 
time. Th e provision of pre -registration allows advance information of registration and 
therefore enables students to make informed choices before the registration deadline.  
 Academic	Affairs	Advisory	18	(Version	4.0,	April	2023)	Page	1	  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  GRADING SYSTEM  a) Grades and Grade Points - At the end of the semester/summer term, the evaluation of a student is done by awarding a letter grade in each of his/her courses by the concerned Instructor-in-Charge, considering his/her performance in the various examinations, quizzes, assignments, laboratory work (if any), etc., besides regularity of attendance in classes. The grades are submitted to the Academic Section within the prescribed time limit of 96 hours of the end of Examination III/last evaluation of the concerned course.  Each Discipline shall evolve a procedure for the award of letter grades in project courses.  The letter grades and their numerical equivalents on a 10-point scale (called Grade Points) are as follows:  Letter Grade A+ A A- B B- C C- D E F Grade Points 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 2 0  • In addition, there are letter grades I, P, which stand for Incomplete, Pass, respectively. The credits with grade P are not counted in SPI/CPI calculation. • Letter grade A+ is given point value of 11 as a mark of excellence. • The SPI/CPI at the end of any semester shall have the maximum limit of 10. In case the SPI/CPI calculation shows the grade point value more than 10, it shall be  limited to 10 points. • The letter grades E and F both are considered as fail grade; a student will have to repeat/replace the course in which he/she gets fail grade. If someone fails in the Foundation Programme, he/she can replace it by a course in Humanities (a General Education course in case of students admitted from 2022-23). The letter grade E may be considered as grade for sufficient exposure to satisfy the pre-requisites of another course, wherever applicable. The letter grade E will be removed from the grading system from Semester 1, 2023-24. • The units of thesis/projects will be graded using letter grades S, U, which stand for Satisfactory, Unsatisfactory, respectively. For students admitted from Semester 1, 2023-24, thesis units will be graded using letter grades A, B, C and F. A, B and C are pass grades and F is a fail grade. However, the grades for thesis units will not be counted towards calculating SPI/CPI.  b) Incomplete Grade ‘I’ - A student may be awarded the grade ‘I’ (Incomplete) in a course if he/she has missed, for a genuine reason, a minor part of the course requirement but has done satisfactorily in all other parts. An ‘I’ grade is not awarded simply because a student has failed to appear in examination(s). An ‘I’ grade must, however, be converted by the Instructor-in-Charge into an appropriate letter grade and communicated to the Academic Academic	Affairs	Advisory	18	(Version	4.0,	April	2023)	Page	2	  Section by the last date specified in the academic calendar for disclosure of grades. Any outstanding ‘I’ grade after this date shall be automatically converted into the ‘F’ grade.  c) Project Grades – Project grades shall be submitted by the last date specified for the submission of grades. An ‘I’ grade will not be given for mere non-completion of project. An ‘I’ grade may be given only on medical grounds.  d) Thesis Grades: A student earns 4 credits for each thesis unit he/she is registered in a semester. The grade S or U will be awarded for thesis units as follows:  At the end of the Semester, the thesis supervisor(s) will assess the student’s progress towards the thesis work during the semester and will award the grade S for each unit if the work is satisfactory and U for every unsatisfactory unit. Thus, a student registered for 4 units can get one of the following five combinations SSSS, SSSU, SSUU, SUUU, UUUU. Format for the Ph.D. thesis grades in the student’s transcripts Thesis Units Thesis Credits Grading Options 5 20 5S, 4S1U, 3S2U, 2S3U,1S4U,5U 4 16 4S, 3S1U, 2S2U, 1S3U, 4U 3 12 3S, 2S1U, 1S2U, 4U 2 08 2S, 1S1U, 2U 1 04 1S, 1U  A thesis unit which is awarded U grade will not be counted towards completion of the required thesis credits. For students admitted from Semester 1, 2023-24, thesis units will be graded using letter grades A, B, C and F. A, B and C are pass grades and F is a fail grade. However, the grades for thesis units will not be counted towards calculating SPI/CPI.  e) Change of Grade Already Awarded - A letter grade once awarded shall not be changed unless the request made by the Instructor-in-Charge of the course is approved by the Chairman, Senate. Any such request for change of grade must, however, be made within six weeks of the start of the next semester in the prescribed form with all relevant records and justification.  f) Semester Performance Index (SPI) – The Semester Performance Index (SPI) is a weighted average of the grade points earned by a student in all the courses credited and describes his/her academic performance in a semester. In case of P grade in a course, the credits of that course are dropped from calculation of SPI. If the grade points associated with the letter grades awarded to a student are g1, g2, g3, g4, and g5 in five courses and the corresponding credits are c1, c2, c3, c4, and c5, the SPI is given by  𝑆𝑃𝐼=𝑐&𝑔&+𝑐)𝑔)+𝑐*𝑔*+𝑐+𝑔++𝑐,𝑔,𝑐&+𝑐)+𝑐*+𝑐++𝑐,  g) Cumulative Performance Index (CPI) - The Cumulative Performance Index (CPI) indicates the overall academic performance of a student in all the courses registered up to and including the latest completed semester/summer term. In case of P grade in a course, the credits of that course are dropped from calculation of CPI. It is computed in the Academic	Affairs	Advisory	18	(Version	4.0,	April	2023)	Page	3	  same manner as the SPI, considering all the courses (say, n), and is given by 𝐶𝑃𝐼=∑𝑐/𝑔/0/1&∑𝑐/0/1& Whenever a student is permitted to repeat or substitute a course, the new letter grade replaces the old letter grade in the computation of the CPI, but, both the grades appear on his/her Grade Report.  h) Grade Report - A copy of the Grade Report is issued to each student at the end of the semester. A duplicate copy, if required, can be obtained on payment of the prescribed fee.  i) Withholding of Grades – The grades of a student may be withheld if he/she has not paid his/her dues, or if there is a case of indiscipline pending against him/her, or for any other reason.  
 
 
Academic Affairs Advisory 05 (November 2023)  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR MTech  PROGRAMME  
 
(As approved by Senate in its 4th meeting held on 2nd December  2010 , updated in the  
24th/36th/39th/44th/60th/63rd meetings of the Senate)  
 
The MTech programme at IITGN will be of two years duration and will consist of coursework as well 
as a project/thesis leading to a dissertation, with equal emphasis placed on both these aspects. The 
coursework would be broad -based to provide knowledge in t he field a student wishes to pursue. The 
project would serve to engage and train students to inculcate in them the abilities for independent 
thinking, and to integrate knowledge towards the solution of R&D problems. The programme will aim 
at graduating wel l-rounded engineers ready to pursue leadership careers in R&D, teaching or industry.  
 
A. Credit Requirements:  
 
 Students will require 32-48 credits of course work , 32-48 credits of thesis  and 2 credits of 
postgraduate orientation programme Aarohan . Note that t he total minimum credit 
requirement is 82 . [Note: The disciplines may specify a minimum course work/thesis work 
requirement of more than 32 credits. ] 
 
1. Course Work:  
 
 The course work will consist of the following components:  
 
▪ The 4-credit “Writing” course  will be required for all students.  
 
▪ In addition to this, at least 4 credits  will have to be earned through Humanities and Social 
Sciences (HSS) courses . One undergraduate level HSS course may be counted towards this 
requirement.   
 
▪ Students must take at least 8 credits of electives  inside or outside the discipline. The choice 
of elective courses will be the student’s discretion, but must be taken in consultation with the 
faculty advisor.  
 
▪ Students must take at least 16 credits of courses specified by the d iscipline . Importantly, 
this does not mean only the courses of the student’s home discipline. For instance, a discipline 
may specify that a certain Mathematics course is required for all its students; such a course 
will be included in this basket. [ Note: P lease check with the discipline to see the list of courses 
which can be counted under this basket.]  
 
▪ Two undergraduate level courses  (with course codes 1XX to 5XX)  may be counted towards 
graduation requirements (besides one UG level HSS course).  
 
▪ Students joining the MTech programme (from semester – I, 2021 -22 onwards) must complete 
two Physical Education (PE) courses , one each in their first two semesters, as part of their 
graduation requirements. These courses will be evaluated on a Pass/No Pass grade basis.  
 
▪ Completing PG Orientation Programme Aarohan  (2 Credits) is a mandatory graduation 
requirement for all MTech students. It is a two -week long programme that all the newly joined 
students are expected to successfully complete before they commen ce the first semester  in 
their academic programme.   
 
 
Academic Affairs Advisory 05 (November 2023)   
 
▪ Successful completion of the program may be mandatory for release of fellowship to the 
students.  
 
▪ In cases where a student fails to clear Aarohan , they must clear an additional two credits worth 
of HSS  courses for graduation (applicable for all students who join from Semester – II, 2022 -
23 onwards).  
 
2. Thesis/Project:  
 
 Although students will be required to earn equal credits for the thesis and coursework, the open -
ended nature of the project will demand c onsiderably more time compared to the coursework. 
Following are some the procedural details of the thesis/project work:  
 
▪ Thesis work can be research -oriented, developmental, industrially relevant, or a combination 
of these. The type of work selected for the thesis would primarily depend on the interest of the 
student and the faculty supervisor(s).  
 
▪ Thesis will be open ended with no deadline for submission . A student may submit when 
the work is completed to the satisfaction of the supervisor(s).  
 
▪ As a bench mark of expectations, it is expected that the work carried out for an MTech 
thesis will be published in a reputed scholarly peer -reviewed journal or conference 
proceedings . The Institute may review periodically the percentage of theses meeting t his 
criterion (that is, if the work of thesis has been published) to assess the health of its MTech 
programme and make appropriate changes in structure of the programme.  
 
▪ Students should select the area and type of work at the end of the first semester and 
identify a faculty member willing to act as thesis supervisor. Thesis co -supervision by up to 
two faculty members may be permitted. It will also be possible for the students to choose 
supervisor from disciplines other than their own discipline, if appropr iate. In some cases, one 
thesis supervisor may be from outside the Institute, but the total number of supervisors will still 
not exceed two.  
 
▪ It is normally expected that students will not register for the thesis in their first semester , 
while they would r egister for thesis credits in the remaining three semesters.  
 
▪ Most MTech students will be receiving Government funded scholarship and are expected to 
spend winter and summer vacation period towards their thesis research . For instance, 
the students will be expected to register for about 10 credits of thesis in summer unless 
there is a specific waiver on justifiable grounds.  
 
▪ Each student would have a three or four member "thesis committee" chaired by thesis 
supervisor.  The Committee will periodically monitor  progress  of the student and advise on 
mid-course corrections.  
 
▪ A student registered for thesis units will be required to submit a research report and make 
an oral presentation to the thesis committee  on the work performed during the semester.   
 
 
Academic Affairs Advisory 05 (November 2023)   
▪ Based on t he report and presentation, thesis supervisor(s) in consultation with the committee, 
will award a satisfactory or unsatisfactory (S/U) grade for each discrete credit of thesis work. 
A thesis credit which is awarded U grade will not be counted towards compl etion  of the 
required thesis credit s, and will, therefore, have to be repeated by the student in a later 
semester or during summer. Grades of thesis units are not counted for the calculation of 
SPI/CPI.  
 
▪ (For students admitted from AY 2023 -24) The thesis units will be graded using A, B, C and 
F grades , where A, B and C are passing grades and F is a fail grade. A student may register 
for one 4 credit thesis unit or a multiple of it and can be graded according to the number of 
units which they ha ve registered for. If a student accumulates F grades in more than 20 
credits of thesis units any time during their MTech programme, the student will have to 
exit the programme . 
 
▪ Thesis grades will not be counted towards CPI calculation.  
 
▪ PGDIIT can be awa rded to regular MTech candidates who successfully finish the coursework 
requirement of 32 -48 credits but do not wish to register for Thesis work or are not found 
suitable for Thesis work by the “thesis committee”. However, an award of PGDIIT to such 
candid ates is contingent upon the Institute approval  and such candidates may have to 
refund the scholarship  received by him/her during the period of coursework.  
 
 A summary  of the credits requirements is mentioned in the table below ( Note: The disciplines may 
specify a credit requirement which is different from the table given below ): 
 
Course  Credits  
Writing  4 
HSS At least 4  
Electives  At least 8  
Courses specified by the discipline  At least 16  
Total Coursework Credits  32 - 48 
Additional Graduation Requirements  
Thesis Credits  32-48 
Aarohan  2 
PE courses (2 courses)  0 
Total Credits  80 + 2 ( Aarohan ) 
 
B. Academic Performance  Requirements:  
 
(Applicable for Students Admitted from AY 2023 -24) 
 
▪ There will be no maximum permissible duration  to complete the requirements of the 
programme. However , at any time, credits earned older than eight years will be deemed 
expired  and will not count towards the graduation requirements. After 7 semesters, a request 
from the student is needed to extend the  programme on a semester by semester basis.  
 
▪ In case the CPI of a student falls below 6.0 out of 10 , the fellowship provided, if any, by the 
Institute will be stopped immediately and for the future.   
  
 
 
Academic Affairs Advisory 05 (November 2023)  ▪ If a student accumulates F grades in more than 20 credits of thesis units  any time during 
their MTech programme, the student will have to exit the programme.  
 
(Applicable for Students Admitted before AY 2023 -24) 
 
▪ The minimum  CPI for graduation is 6.0  out of 10.  
 
▪ The minimum CPI for continuing in the programme at any point is 5.5  out of 10. That is, 
if at any stage, the student has a CPI less than 5.5, the programme will be terminated.  
 
▪ In case the CPI of a student falls below 6.0 or the student accumulates three or more Us 
towards thesis grades at any  point of time, the fellowship provided by the Institute will be 
stopped permanently. The student may seek financial support from projects or other Institute 
activities through individual effort.  
 
▪ In exceptional cases, continuation of the fellowship may be approved by the Director on 
recommendation of Dean, Academic Affairs.  
 
▪ Full-time MTech students will have a maximum of three years to obtain the degree.  
 
▪ Students  may opt for the rules for termina tion as applicable for students admitted from AY 
2023 -24. 
 
 
  
Academic Affairs Advisory 16 (October 2022)  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  SCHEME FOR CASH AWARDS TO STUDENTS  FOR JOURNAL PUBLICATIONS  (As approved by the Board of Governors in its 9th meeting held on 28th March 2013, updated in the 30th Meeting of the Senate held on 17th April 2018 and in 50th Meeting of the Senate held on 19th April 2021)  1. IIT Gandhinagar encourages its students, both undergraduate and postgraduate, towards research. There is provision of a modest cash incentive to the students of the Institute for journal publications. Such an incentive is expected to  a. Communicate in unequivocal manner the Institute’s focus towards research, b. Help quantify the research output of the students in individual academic streams/ groups/ departments and set goals and benchmarks, c. Recognize students who do well in research and create role models, and d. Provide financial incentive to students who otherwise face several disadvantages over their counterparts in the older IITs.  2. The eligible papers must be:  a. Published in a journal listed on the ISI Web of Science or presented in a highly rated conferences in case the field is Computer Science and Engineering. b. Must list the affiliation of the concerned student as IIT Gandhinagar in an unambiguous manner. c. The quality of paper be assessed by a faculty group to establish the academic adequacy of the publication.  3. In the field of Computer Science and Engineering, publications presented in A* (Exceptional), A (Excellent), and B (Very Good to Good) rated conferences are to be considered for cash awards upon careful evaluation of the papers and subsequent recommendations of the Dean (AA). The quality of papers presented in conferences that are rated as C (Sound and Satisfactory) however, would need additional assessment and recommendations by a committee duly appointed by the Dean (AA), before considering them for publication cash awards. The CORE portal (2018, 2020 or later) will be the only source for conference ratings for consideration of publication cash awards.   4. In some areas (such as Humanities and Social Sciences), it may be more appropriate for the students to publish their research elsewhere (and not in the journals listed on ISI Web of Science). Should a student feel that his/her work published elsewhere should be considered for the cash award, he/ she may seek  
Academic Affairs Advisory 16 (October 2022)  a case-by-case exemption from the requirement of clause 2(a) above by submitting a written justification.  5. Any registered BTech, MSc, MA or MTech student (full- or part-time) of IITGN who publishes an eligible paper will be given a cash award of Rs 25,000. In case the paper is authored by more than one student of IITGN, the amount of Rs 25,000 will be shared by them.  6. A student can receive a maximum of Rs 50,000 under this scheme during his/her degree programme.  7. In many cases, the review process at the journal end causes considerable delays in acceptance and publication of the paper. A student may claim the cash award for upto 3 years after the date of completion of his/her degree requirements. Further, on a case-by-case basis, the committee may recommend the award even if the paper is not yet published but is accepted for publication by the journal without requiring any further corrections.  8. A Committee will examine the applications and recommend the cash awards to the Director for approval. The Committee will normally be chaired by Dean of Academic Affairs or Dean Research and Development.  9. Expenditure on this scheme will be covered from the “Excellence Funds” as approved by the Board of Governors from time to time, such as donations, interest income of the endowment, and overheads and savings of the projects.  10. The scheme covers all eligible students including those who have already graduated.   	Faculty Affairs Advisory 1 0 (Version  2.0, April 201 9) Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 FACULTY RESEARCH FELLOWSHIPS  TO NEW / YOUNG FACULTY  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 3rd meeting held on 07 January 2011,  
in its 7th meeting held on 23 June 2012 and in its 26th meeting held on 01 March 2019)  
 
The Board of Governors at its third  meeting held on 07 January 2011  had approved the Faculty 
Research Fellowships at the rate of Rs 15,000 /- per month for new / young faculty from donor 
funds. The Senate approved the following modalities for implementation of the Research 
Fellowships:  
1) At the time of faculty recruitments, advice of the Selection Committee (or the Standing 
Committee) be sought a nd wherever the Committee considers appropriate, the Fellowship be 
offered to the concerned persons after obtaining approval of the Chairman of the Board of 
Governors.  
2) All the faculty members who join the Institute be given periodic opportunities to submit  
research proposals to be funded internally by IIT Gandhinagar. Such proposals be peer -
reviewed by external experts and a final view be taken by a Standing Committee of the 
Institute on funding of such proposals.  
3) Some of the faculty members who were not aw arded Research Fellowships at the time of 
selection, but whose research is considered to be of very high caliber and whose 
performance in the Institute is considered exemplary, be offered Research Fellowships on 
recommendation of the Standing Committee and  approval of the Chairman of Board of 
Governors.  
4) In all cases, the Fellowships be awarded for a period of three years, but be renewed on an 
annual basis depending on the progress of the incumbent towards his/her research, and 
availability of funds.  
5) The incumbent should be not more than 40 years of age at the time of award of this 
Fellowship. The incumbent will be eligible for one more term of three years, depending on 
performance; i.e., one can avail of the Fellowship for a maximum period of six year s.  
6) The incumbent will be expected to send an annual report to the donor on his/her research 
activities in a format prescribed by the Institute from time to time. The report shall be sent 
through the official channels of the Institute; failure to submit su ch a report in a timely manner 
should lead to discontinuation of the Fellowship.  
7) The Chairman is authorized by Senate to finalize a suitable title for such fellowships in 
consultation with the respective donors.  
 
The Board in its 7th meeting held on 23 June 2012  approved enhancement of the Research 
Fellowship for new/young faculty members in slabs of Rs. 15,000/ - p.m. and Rs.25,000/ - p.m. 
with option of no fellowship that is in operation at lITGN. The Board also recalled the Young 
Leader Fellowship for f aculty approved in the 3 rd meeting and approved that the honorarium for 
the same may also be either Rs. 15,000/ - p.m. or Rs. 25,000 /- on a case by case basis. The 
Board also approved the proposal for enhancing the amount of honorarium for Faculty Chair to 
Rs. 50,000/ - p.m. from the present Rs. 25,000/ - p.m. 
 
Further, the Board in its 26th meeting held on 01 March 2019  has approved the following 
enhancement in the Faculty Research Fellowship and honorarium for Faculty Chairs  for new 
offers . 
 
a) Revision of faculty Research Fellowship slabs to Rs. 25,000/ - and Rs. 40,000/ - per month 
(from the existing slabs of Rs. 15,000/ - and Rs. 25,000/ -, respectively).  
b) Rates of Faculty Chair to be in the range of Rs. 50,000/ - to Rs. 1,00,000/ - per month (fr om 
the existing rate of Rs. 50,000/ - per month).  Research and Development  Advisory 16 (Version 1.0, September 2022 )                          Page 1 of 6 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
IITGN -X: EDUCATION OUTREACH PROGRAMME  
(As approved by the BoG in its 34th meeting held on 28 April 2022) 
 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 34th meeting held on 28 April 2022 
approved the following  IITGN -X: Education Outreach Program at IIT Gandhinagar . 
 
Objective of the Program  
 
IITGN -X is an education outreach program of IIT Gandhinagar to build knowledge 
societies. As an institution of national importance, it is IITGN’s  mission and 
responsibility to promote epistemic endeavors of different sections of the society 
through its uniquely designed programs and initiatives. The engagement through 
IITGN -X is envisaged to impact and contribute to the development and advancement 
of human aspiration.  
 
Structure and Scope of the Program  
 
IITGN -X strives  to engage with industry, professionals, educational institutions, 
schools, research entities, government and non -government institutions/  
establishments, and think -tanks through its  various programs at national and 
international level.  
 
The classification given below is a broad structure of the IITGN -X activities. Also, 
one can refer to Annexure -I for further details.  
 
Type -I: Professional Meetings and Activities  
 
Any conferences, seminars, symposia, workshops are classified under this category. 
The purpose of these meetings and events is to enable IITGN faculty to share their 
expertise and research with their colleagues outside the Institute, funding agencies 
and t he industries. The faculty engaging in these activities are encouraged to involve 
other faculty members from IITGN and outside, and use these platforms to promote 
their own research. Typical examples include but are not limited to the following:  
 
1. Scientifi c conferences/seminars/symposia/conclaves initiated by the Institute 
faculty. It includes activities of the IITGN Centers/Initiatives.  
2. Meetings for governmental funding agencies for instance, PAC meeting for DST -
SERB  
3. Workshops related to professional pract ice and/or research  
4. Activities as part of the sponsored (research) projects like SPARC, VAJRA etc.  
 
Type -II: Individual Centric Programs  
 
These include activities that the faculty pursue  in their own individual capacities in 
order to share their knowledge and research expertise with the external agencies, 
including industry professionals and students. These activities are conducted in a 
narrow area of work, by IITGN faculty for industry a nd academia, either online/offline Research and Development  Advisory 16 (Version 1.0, September 2022 )                          Page 2 of 6 
 at IITGN or at an external location. Typical examples include but are not limited to 
the following:  
 
1. Courses and training programs for external participants in the domain of 
research/ expertise of the faculty  
2. Activities c onducted as part of the sponsored projects like GIAN, Accelerate 
Vigyan etc.  
 
Type -III: Institutional Projects and Programs  
 
These are the activities that are of interest of the Institute and geared towards 
providing a platform for dissemination of knowled ge and expertise with various 
external parties. Many non -career faculty are expected to leverage these activities to 
generate funds for the Institute. Typically, these activities include but are not limited to  
 
1. Activities, including training programs, courses, etc. conducted by IITGN centres.  
2. Certification courses and programs along the lines of Executive Education.  
3. Training programs for instrument usage like, TEM, SEM, XRD, NMR etc.  
4. Programs conducted on the request of external agencies to the Institute/centre like, 
Maritime boards, Forest departments, Municipal corporations, Educational 
institutions, etc . 
5. Activities related to the Institute’s community outreach, like NEEV etc.  
6. Any activity that cannot be clas sified under Type -I and Type -II. 
 
Registration and Fee Collection  
 
1. The courses can be offered in purely online, purely offline and hybrid (partly 
online/offline) modes. Courses offered in hybrid modes shall be considered as 
offline mode for the budgeting p urposes.  
2. The IITGN -X office will facilitate in setting up the portal for fee collection.  
 
Overheads  
 
A flat overhead of 20% shall be charged on total revenue after GST for any activity 
conducted under IITGN -X irrespective of whether it is conducted online/ offline 
within/outside IITGN premises. However, the norms of the sponsoring agency can be 
accommodated with due approval from Dean R&D.  
 
Honorarium and Coordination Fees  
 
Eligibility  
 
1. Type -I: No honorarium and/or coordination fees shall be paid to IITGN faculty 
members unless provisioned for in the sponsoring grant, however, reasonable 
honorarium can be paid to external speakers on prior approval. In addition, 
reasonable honorarium can be paid to support staff and students involved in the 
activity at the prescribed rates, depending upon their involvement in the activity.  
2. Type -II: Honorarium and/or coordination fees can be paid to any IITGN faculty, 
support staff and students at the prescribed rates. In addition, reasonable 
honorarium can be paid to external speakers on prior approval.  Research and Development  Advisory 16 (Version 1.0, September 2022 )                          Page 3 of 6 
 3. Type -III: Honorarium and/or coordination fees shall be paid to IITGN career faculty 
at the prescribed rates. The non -career faculty of IITGN (Research Faculty, 
Professor -of-Practice, Visiting Faculty, Scholar -in-residen ce, Guest faculty) may be 
paid honorarium at prescribed rates upon prior approval. In addition, reasonable 
honorarium can be paid to support staff and students involved in the activity.  
 
Rates  
 
1. The maximum honorarium rates for the faculty members (both external and 
internal) is Rs. 10,000/ - per hour of their instruction time.  
2. The faculty members who are involved in the coordination of the course can 
receive the honorarium for coordination up to Rs. 2,500/ - per hour of the event in 
offline mode and Rs. 1,000/ - for online mode.  
3. The honorarium paid to the support staff/TAs in total is capped at the amount 
calculated as per the rates for coordination (see Point 2 above).  
4. The honorarium/coordination f ees can be transferred to the faculty’s PDA upon 
request.  
 
Net Earnings  
 
The net earnings for any activity is the balance amount after deduction of all the 
expenses, including, logistics, GST, overheads etc., except honorarium  
 
1. Type -I: Net earnings are transferred, in the name of the PI, to the Joint 
Conference Account managed by R&D Office. This amount can be utilized later 
by the same faculty member in other such activities and providing financial 
support for students. In case an activity is conducted under a Centre or an 
Initiative at IITGN, the net earnings can be transferred to the account of Centre/  
Initiative in R&D office.  
2. Type -II: 20% of the net earnings of the course shall be transferred to the discipline's 
DPA and remaining amount can be utiliz ed for honorarium. The amount that is 
available after paying honorarium can be transferred to faculty’s PDA.  
3. Type -III: Net earnings are transferred to an IITGN -X account managed by R&D 
Office. The amount can be utilized for the promotion and support of IIT GN-X and 
other Institute activities. In case an activity is conducted by a Centre/Initiative at 
IITGN, the net earnings can be transferred to their respective accounts in R&D 
office.  
 
Certificates to Participants  
 
1. The “Certificate of Participation” can be provided to all the eligible candidates by 
the office of IITGN -X, upon request from the faculty coordinator.  
2. The “Certificate of Passing” for the Executive Education like activities, mentioned 
in Type -III of IITGN -X, shall only be issued to those participants that have 
successfully completed the assessments.  
 
Support Services  
 
The registration fees shall be collected through IITGN’s Fee Collection portal. The 
Institute shall provide access to its support services f or all the activities. In case, the Research and Development  Advisory 16 (Version 1.0, September 2022 )                          Page 4 of 6 
 supporting grant does not provide significant overheads to the Institute, the activity 
coordinator can use the standard applicable rates for support services, provided 
through the office of IITGN -X as per norms.  
 
Accommodation Charges  
 
1. The faculty coordinator can send the requests for booking of guest house rooms 
and hostel rooms to the office of IITGN -X at least 15 days in advance, which can 
be allocated subject to availability of rooms at the time of request. The  guest 
house and hostel charges shall be applicable according to the prevailing  Institute 
norms (as per norms).  
2. The accommodation charges of the participants are generally expected to be 
paid separately by them. However, if necessary, it may be included in  the 
registration fees for the program and can be paid directly from the revenue 
collected from the event.  
3. In case the activity is conducted in online mode, it shall be assumed that no 
accommodation is required, unless stated otherwise.  
 
Transportation and  Other Charges  
 
1. The costs associated with travel of speakers, local transportation, food etc. shall 
be met from the revenue of the activity.  
2. The costs associated with catering requirements during the event shall be met 
from revenue of the activity.  
 
  Research and Development  Advisory 16 (Version 1.0, September 2022 )                          Page 5 of 6 
 Annexure -I: Some Scenarios for Classifying Activities  
1. A faculty member is approached by an industry, or vice versa, for organising a 
training program involving the use of a high performance computing (HPC) 
cluster. What will be the classification of this a ctivity?  
It depends on the nature of the training program. For instance, if the focus of the training 
program is on how to use a HPC, it shall be classified as Type -III activity. It is 
considered similar to any other instrument training program (for TEM, S EM, AFM, NMR 
etc.). However, if use of HPC facilities forms a small part of a focused training program, 
it shall be considered as a Type -II activity. A similar training program, which involves the 
use of computer labs may be considered as Type -II activity.   
2. An industry professional approaches an IITGN faculty member for conducting a 
specialised course in the area of his/her area of expertise at the premises of the 
industry. What will be the classification of this activity?  
If a career faculty is executing a course and the activity falls in his/her domain of 
expertise, then the faculty can request the activity as Type -II. On the other hand, if a 
non-career faculty (Professor -of-Practice, Research Professor, etc.) conducts suc h an 
activity, it shall be considered as Type -III. Irrespective of whether the activity is 
conducted at IITGN or outside, IITGN administration must be apprised about it, due 
process must be followed and the activity must be approved.  
3. A consultancy project driven by the faculty requires a training workshop to be 
conducted for its employees. Will this activity be a Type -II or Type -III activity?  
The consultancy projects are primarily in the narrow focus area of expertise of the 
faculty that drives it. Thus, in  this case the activity shall be considered as Type -II 
activity. As far as the honoraria is concerned, the consultancy project norms will apply.  
4. A government agency, like the High Court, Green Tribunal or Department of 
Transportation, approaches IITGN for designing question papers for recruitment 
of their staff. Will the activity come under IITGN -X? If so, under what category?  
This activity is not related to education and hence will not classify as an IITGN -X 
activity.  
5. An industry approaches an IITGN facult y member to conduct a training program 
on Fire Safety. It turns out that faculty is also associated with the Safety Center of 
the Institute. Will this activity come under Type -II or Type III?  
Generally, such an activity will be classified as Type -III. It i s strongly encouraged to 
conduct such programs to build funding of the Centre. However, the faculty member can 
submit a request to classify it as Type -II in case the activity primarily falls into their 
narrow research area.  
6. IITGN was running a TEQIP progr am under the aegis of MoE. What different types 
of IITGN -X activities are possible under such funding sources to conduct training 
programs for a sector and what is their classification?  
There were two types of activities under the TEQIP program. (1) Course s and programs 
that had a broader scope, for example, program on research methodology, faculty 
induction programs etc. These activities are classified under Type -III. (2) Courses in the 
narrowly focused  areas, for example, thermodynamics, signal processing , VLSI design 
etc. These are classified under Type -II. Similar categorization can be followed for other 
such projects.  Research and Development  Advisory 16 (Version 1.0, September 2022 )                          Page 6 of 6 
 7. IITGN has been running a sponsored project on education through its Creative 
Learning Center. As part of the project it is required to co nduct separate 
workshops for school children and vocational training programs. What are the 
classifications of these activities?  
The workshop for school children shall be classified under Type -I activity whereas the 
vocational training program shall be classified as Type -III activity. The reason for this 
classification is that vocational training is aligned with the vision and mission of the 
Creative Learning Center.  
8. Kerala Water Authority (KWA) contacted IITGN for conducting a short course on 
Domestic W ater Management. Will it classify as Type -II or Type -III activity?  
There are multiple faculty at IITGN that work in the area of water management. The 
Institute shall identify the faculty closely working in this area as the coordinator to run it 
as Type -III activity.  
9. An IITGN faculty, including visiting, adjunct  or guest faculty, approaches the 
IITGN -X coordinator for conducting a short course in his/her domain of expertise. 
The faculty proposes that the course is primarily of IITGN students/scholars but 
shall be open to external participants without any registration fees? Will it be 
classified as Type -II or Type -III? 
The programs that are mainly focused  on IITGN students are not part of IITGN -X. The 
faculty should approach the Short Course Coordinator, thr ough the Academic Office, for 
conducting these courses.  
10. Two faculty members from different disciplines plan to organise an online 
conference on Fluid Mechanics with external participants without any registration 
fees. What is the classification of this act ivity?  
It is advisable to keep a reasonable registration fee for a conference. In any case, the 
activity will be considered as Type -I. In case a conference is proposed to be conducted 
in offline mode without any registration fees, the proposer needs to jus tify from what 
sources the expenses for organising this conference shall be met.  
11. Design and Innovation center proposes to conduct a brainstorming session for 
design practice with the professionals in this area. Under what category, the 
activity shall be c lassified?  
The brainstorming session involves external participants and serves as the platform for 
sharing ideas and expertise of IITGN and hence, it shall be classified as Type -I. 
12. A faculty member proposes to conduct an excursion for the students from his /her 
research group to discuss the modalities of research, and methods to increase 
the efficiency in work output. The faculty plans to fund the expenses of excursion 
from their PDA/Consultancy project. Will this be considered as an IITGN -X 
activity?  
As the  activity involves no external parties and thus does not qualify as an IITGN -X 
activity.  
13. A faculty member of HSS proposes to conduct a HSS camp with a set of seminars 
or webinars for external participants. What is the classification of this activity?  
It shall be classified as Type -I. 
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 25 (Version 1.0, February 201 9)                                   Page 1 of 1 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
ENCOURAGE FACULTY TO SUPPORT Ph D STUDENTS THROUGH  
EXTERNAL PROJECTS  
(As approved by the BoG in its 25th meeting held on 03 December 2018)  
 
IITGN  currently has more than 300 PhD  students on roll. The Institute has been 
liberal in terms of providing financial support to thes e students. More than 85% of 
PhD students receive a fellowship from the Institute, while the rest are supported 
from other sources.  However , it is imperative t hat faculty should start supporting PhD  
students on their external projects even when the Institute resources are not so 
strained. This will prepare the Institute in the long run for a robust PhD programme 
even when the Institute budget goes through severe  constraints on this account.  
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 25th meeting held on 03 December 
2018 approved that fo r faculty members supporting PhD  students on their externally 
funded projects, an amount of Rs. 60,000 per year be transferr ed to their 
Professional Development Account (PDA) for each full year that the student is 
supported on the external source. The terms & conditions of the scheme will be as 
under.  
 
 The project must have sufficient funds to cover the student for at least 1 y ear. 
 The money will be transferred upon completion of the said year; for instance, if a 
student was supported on a faculty member’s grant from July 2018 to June 2019, 
the money will be transferred in July 2019.  
 PhD students supported on large, institution al fellowships (e.g., Visvesvaraya 
Fellowships, Prime Minister’s Research Fellowship, etc.) or industry fellowships 
meant specially for PhD students (e.g., TCS fellowship, Google awards, etc.) are 
not eligible.  
 If a student is partially supported by the external projects and relies on the 
Institute for remainder of the support, the amount to be transferred to the PDA will 
be pro -rated accordingly.  
 The duration of support will be till the student continues to be supported on the 
external funds. If the stud ent moves to Institute support at any time (for instance, 
due to completion of the external project), this extra support will also be stopped.  
 
Fund utilization from the PDA will be subject to usual Institute norms. This expense 
will be covered from the R& D income of the Institute or Excellence Funds (IGR 
Excellence Fund/ R&D Excellence Fund) and will be subject to availability of funds. 
This will be effective from 01 January 2019 through 31 March 2023.  
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 19 (version 1.0, October 2017)  Page 1  
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
ADVISORY ON WORK PLACE PRESENCE  FOR FACULTY  
 
The Schedule C of the Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar provides Conduct Rules applicable 
to the employees of the Institute . As per the conduct rules, f aculty  members  are 
expected to maintain regular working hours and an appropriate presence in the Institute 
premises . However, b y nature of the ir job, faculty  need s flexibility to function efficiently  
and generally  end up spending more than normal working hours . It therefore may not be 
appropriate to prescribe rigid working hours  for faculty. Accordingly, IITGN does not 
impose strict office hours  on faculty but expects faculty to  use this flexibility in a 
responsible manner. This advisory is meant to clarify further on the matter of scheduled 
office hours and the presence of faculty in the Institute.  
 
1. Faculty members are expected to use their discretion and ensure appropriate 
presence in the Institute  during normal working hours . On an average, a faculty 
member is expected to spend at least  40 hours per week in  the academic area.  
 
2. If for whatever reason a faculty member is not able to come to the Institute 
(academic area)  on a working  day, he/she must apply for appropriate leave. A  
faculty member can avail leaves of different types.  Also, the General 
Administration Advisory No. 12 provides clarifications on some of the matters 
related to leaves.  
 
3. The leave shall always be applied for and sanctioned before it is taken except in 
cases  of emergency and for satisfactory reasons. Leave cannot be claimed as 
right and in case of an exigency a leave application may be refused or revoked 
by the authority empowered to sanction the leave.  
 
4. Faculty member shall not leave station except with the previous permission of 
proper authority, even during leave or vacation. International travel, both 
personal and professional, requires a prior approval by the Director .  
 
5. It is expected that faculty me mbers plan their leave/travel properly and avoid any 
major travel during the semester  so as to minimize disruption  to teaching 
activities . 
 
 
Encl: Schedule C of Statutes  of IIT Gandhinagar covering Conduct Rules  
 
 
 Student  Affairs Advisory 15 (Version 1.0, May 2021)                                                Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
VIKRAM SARABHAI RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP   
(As approved by the BoG in its 31st meeting held on 23 April 2021) 
 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 31st meeting held on 23 April 2021 
approved the following proposal for Vikram Sarabhai Research Fellowship . 
  
IIT Gandhinagar seeks to enable all its Ph.D. students to complete their graduation in a 
timely manner so that they have a competitive advantage. The aim is that most of the 
Ph.D. students should complete  their Ph.D. within five years and a fair number of 
students should complete within four years.  
 
All Ph.D. students who submit thesis within 48 months (4 years), will be eligible for a 
12-month research fellowship at a rate higher than the Ph.D fellowship  rate. This is to 
encourage our students to strive to complete early, and utilize the 12 month period to 
explore new areas of research, extend their Ph.D. work, publish scholarly articles and 
books, and look for good career opportunities. The fellowship will be provided at the 
rate of Rs 44,000/ - per month (~1.25 times the rate of PhD fellowship). The fellowship 
rate may be periodically enhanced whenever the Ph.D. fellowship rates are enhanced. 
In some cases, the faculty may also like to provide a top -up fellowship from their own 
projects/ PDA to retain the outstanding candidates. Rest of the norms be generally 
similar to the norms for post -doctoral fellowships as applicable from time to time.  
 Academic Affairs Advisory (Version 1. 0 July 2021)                                                     Page 1 of 2 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 
Norms for Undergraduate Teaching Assistantship  
(As approved by the Senate in its 49th meeting held on 22nd February 2021)  
 
IIT Gandhinagar attracts some of the best undergraduate (UG) students in the country. 
While teaching such bright students is a great privilege, the Institute has an enormous 
responsibility of grooming future engineers and leaders of the country. IITGN has therefore 
placed a great emphasis on providing outstanding education while facilitating a holistic 
development of students. To further enrich the educational experience of UG students, it is 
proposed to add a new dimension to their learning, that prepares students for teaching.   
 
The On -Campus Employment Opportunities (O -CEO), formerly known as the Earn -While -
You- Learn (EWYL) programme, has been a step in this direction. Although UG students 
have occasionally participated in teaching activities through th e EWYL/O -CEO programme, 
the focus of the EWYL/O -CEO programme has largely been to develop job skills and 
leadership skills through a variety of employment opportunities. A dedicated program, that 
formally engages UG students in teaching, would not only pro vide an enriching academic 
experience, it would also create an opportunity to develop teaching and mentoring skills 
among the undergraduate students.   
 
The Undergraduate Teaching Assistantship (UGTA) programme  has been established  to 
provide teaching experience to UG students. Under the UGTA programme, the UGTAs are 
expected to assist the instructors and tutors in the conduct of the course. It is expected that 
engaging the UGTAs would facilitate an effective student engagement and learning, as 
students are known to actively learn from their peer group because they share the same 
generational perspectives. Some of the responsibilities of the UGTAs include:  
 
1. Providing assistan ce to instructors and tutors in conduct of assessments.  
2. Helping instructors and tutors in preparation of assignments, projects and other 
learning activities  
3. Guiding and mentoring of students by holding regular discussion sessions  
4. Helping lab instructors a nd tutors in conduct of labs and tutorials  
 
Eligibility:  
 
1. Students enrolled in the Dual Major B.Tech. and Dual Degree programmes, who 
have completed four semesters at IITGN, are also eligible to apply.  
2. Students must have a CPI of 8.5 or above to be eligible to apply for the UGTA 
programme.  Students with a CPI of 7.5 or above are eligible to apply provided they 
have secured an A or A - grade in the course for which they are applying to serve as 
UGTA.  
3. Students applying for this programme should not hav e any backlogs and should not 
have received E or F grade in any course (>1 credit) at IITGN.  
4. Students should have completed the specific course (or equivalent) for which they Academic Affairs Advisory (Version 1. 0 July 2021)                                                     Page 2 of 2 
 are expected to provide assistance as UGTA.  
5. Students must have completed a teachi ng assistant preparation programme to be 
eligible to apply. This preparation program would train the UG students to become 
effective facilitators of learning, as the UG students do not have a formal training on 
this front and is critical for a successful i mplementation of the UGTA programme. 
Details of the preparation programme will be worked out.  
6. Students who have received sanctions from SSAC will not be eligible.  
 
Workload and stipend:  
 
1. Selected students are expected to work for upto 8 hours per week during the 
semester.  
2. The UGTAs will be paid a stipend at the rate of Rs. 200 to 250 per hour. The stipend 
rate may be enhanced from time to time in order to account for inflation.  
3. At a give n time, a student can avail Teaching Assistantship of any one kind.  
 
Application Process and Selection:  
 
1. The Academic Office will compile a list of UGTA positions based on the 
recommendations from disciplines. The list of UGTA positions will be shared wit h the 
students at the time of application.  
2. The concerned team of instructors and tutors shall review the applications received 
for each UGTA position and submit the recommendations to Dean, Academics.  
3. The recommendations shall be reviewed by Associate Dean of UG studies and Dean 
Academics for submission to the Director for approval.  
 Additional Annexure 12.1/Agenda /28th Senate /IITGN/ 04 September 2017/Page 3 ANNEXURE 12.1 of the  
Agenda of Twenty Eighth meeting of SENATE  
Dated 04 September 2017  
 
 
Additional Annexure 12.1/Agenda /28th Senate /IITGN/ 04 September 2017/Page 4  
 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR 
 
NORMS FOR THREE -YEAR B.SC. DEGREE IN ENGINEERING  
(As approved by the BoG in its 29th meeting held on 20th August 2020)  
 
Background  
 
A number of undergraduate students joining the IIT system through the Joint Entrance 
Examination (JEE) find it difficult to undergo rigorous academic programme at the IITs, 
and are often faced with the prospect of having to leave the programme without obtaining a degree. The difficulty in going through the curriculum may arise due to a variety of reasons. Further, some of the students do go through the programme successfully with a 
decent CPI, even though their career interests lie elsewhere (civil services , MBA, family 
business, etc.).  
 
IITGN has undertaken a number of steps to try and help students having academic 
difficulties. For instance, the 5- week Foundation Programme at the beginning of the first 
semester helps prepare the students to adjust in the new cultural milieu. The Counselling 
Service proactively identifies students facing a variety of challenges and provides help. An effective Guided Progress Scheme (GPS) has been developed, wherein the students 
are paid special attention and are allowed reduced academic load. Students facing 
difficulties with the English language are offered extra help via the Peer Assisted Learning Program. Academic Discussion Hours, which are conducted in informal hostel spaces, bring together junior and senior students for discussions on specific courses.  
 Despite these efforts, a few students still struggle to cope with the academic requirements. This leads to high failure rates, which then trigger mental health problems. 
With increasing student strength, and increasing number of distractions for the students, this is likely to rise. This problem was also acknowledged at the level of the IIT Council, 
and the Council in its 53
rd meeting held on 27th November 2019 approved a proposal to 
allow such students to exit the progr am upon completion of a “minimum academic 
standard” with an alternate B.Sc. (Engineering) degree.  
 Graduation Requirements and Norms  
 
1. A three -year B.Sc. degree in Engineering be created at IITGN, without any sub-
specialization.  
2. This will only be an “Exit” degree and no separate admission will be offered into 
this program.  
 
 
Academic Affairs Advisory 52 (Version 1.0, July 2021)  
Page 1  
 
 3. The graduation requirements for this degree will be lower and fairly flexible in 
order to enable students to exit comfortably with a degree (see Degree Requirements).  
4. Any undergraduate student (including existing students), may apply for conversion to this program any time after the end of his/her fourth active semester.  
5. A student opting for this program will typicall y not be permitted to convert back to 
the B.Tech. degree. In exceptional circumstances, the Chairman, Senate may approve re- conversion to B.Tech. upon recommendation of the Dean, Academic 
Affairs / Associate Dean (UG).  
6. Instance of students exiting via the B.Sc. degree in Engineering should be rare, 
and efforts should be made to encourage students to complete their B.Tech. degree program.  
 
Degree Requirements 
 
1. A student opting to exit the institute with a B.Sc. degree in Engineering degree 
will be required to complete at least 100 credits of coursework.  
2. Out of these, at least 60 credits will have to be earned via courses in Engineering 
and/or Natural Sciences (Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics, Earth Science, some courses of Cognitive Science).  
3. Further, up to 16 credits may be earned online via MOOCs. The norms for 
earning credits via MOOCs will be as applicable to B.Tech. students at the institute.  
4. Minimum Registration, Overload, Underload, GPS, Pass/Fail, Repetition/Substitution of courses and other norms wil l be as applicable to 
B.Tech. students.  
 Minimum Residency and Maximum Duration:  
 
A student exiting via the B.Sc. degree in Engineering should have spent at least 6 active 
semesters at the institute. Further, the maximum permissible duration to obtain thi s 
degree will be 7 years from the date of enrolment in the original B.Tech. program.  
 
Fees:  
 
Fees and fee payment norms will be as applicable to B.Tech. students.  
 
 
 
Academic Affairs Advisory 52 (Version 1.0, July 2021)  Page 2  
 Student Affairs Advisory 1 0 (March 2020)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
STUDENT AFFAIRS  
NORMS FOR IIT GANDHINAGAR EXPLORER’S FELLOWSHIP  
  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 15th meeting held on 02 December 2014)  
 
IIT Gandhinagar Explorer’s Fellowship enables  students to un dertake travel to explore 
different parts of the country  and gain new prospectives . IIT Gandhinagar Explorer’s 
Fellowships are intended to introduce students to cultures, people, and areas of India with 
which they are not familiar. Fellows will make powerf ul connections and find opportunities 
to foster dialogue with people from different walks of life. They will share who they are and 
where they come from while learning from others about their customs and ways, who they 
are, what they do, and what matters t o them. Fellows will get a glimpse of many places and 
many lives. The Fellows will travel fast – tasting, not savoring – in order to gain a breadth of 
understanding. Their journey will spark insight, curiosity, reflection, compassion, and 
commitment. This is not the usual tourist experience, instead Fellows will roam and get lost, 
walk off the well -worn path, only to find themselves on unexpected adventures. They will 
seek the novel, the foreign, the unknown and the uncomfortable. At times they will realize  
their great strengths, other times they will be confronted with sheer humility. In six weeks 
they will explore a small chunk of the world and a large chunk of themselves.  
 
Guidelines  
  
 Fellows must commit to travel in a group two or three members during t he summer 
break (May – July),  
 Fellows must commit to exploring six or more states, which should include atleast one 
state each from south, north and north -east regions of India.  
 The fellows must commit to travel at least six weeks.  
 Fellows must travel via Sleeper Class trains and state government buses and must stay 
in budget accommodation, such as Dharamsalas, Homestays and Youth Hostels.   
 Fellows are encouraged to organize their travel around a theme (E.g. Cuisines, 
folklore, oral history, indigenous tech nology etc.)  
 
Eligibility  and Selection    
 
In order to apply for IIT Gandhinagar Explorer’s Fellowships , applicant must be regular 
student of IITGN and must be at least 18 years old. All complete applications will be 
scrutinized by the Senate Scholarships and Prize Committee  (SSPC) . Shortlisted applicants 
will be invited for an interview by the committee to make the final selection. The fellowship 
amount would be in the range of Rs. 35,000 /- – Rs. 50,000 /- per person and will be 
periodically increased to co ver for inflation. The evaluation of the applications would be 
based on the originality and feasibility of proposal and the performance during interview, if 
applicable. The graduating seniors can also avail this fellowship within two months of their 
gradua tion. 
 
The Application     
 
An applicant must submit write up on the travel plans which would include goals/ objectives/  
outcomes, timeline, budget and action plan/ ideas for follow -on activities. The applicant will  
also submit his/ her current resume. Foll owing the travel, the recipient agrees to submit a 
report describing experiences and analyzing objectives achieved; share his/ her experiences 
with others; and be available to make a presentation to the IITGN community. The applicant 
is expected to maintai n a diary/ blog during the travels; upto two students with best kept 
diaries/ blogs will receive a prize of Rs. 5,000/ - and a certificate of merit.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Version 2, Updated on August 1, 2021  Page 1 
 GUIDELINES FOR EFFECTIVE TEACHING  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IIT GANDHINAGAR   
 
 
 
 
 
Version 2, Updated on August 1, 2021  Page 2 
 PREFACE  
 
IIT Gandhinagar wishes to set exemplary standards in academics and research. 
Central to this goal is adoption of some of the best practices in the planning, 
organization, and conduct of courses that are taught at the Institute. The aim of 
developing this d ocument is to explicitly lay out some of these best practices in 
course conduct, and encourage their implementation . While developing this content, 
inputs have been drawn from other reputed institutions from India and abroad.  
 
This document has not been  developed as a “rule book”. Rather, it is designed to 
serve as a guideline to help develop and maintain a high teaching standard in the      
Institute. It also highlights the freedom and flexibility in the operation of courses. It is 
hoped that widesprea d adoption of these practices will enable us to improve and 
sustain the quality of instruction at the Institute.    
 
 
 
 
Version 2, Updated on August 1, 2021  Page 3 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1. Class Schedule          4 
 
2. Course Planning and Operation        4 
 
3. Learning Outcomes            7 
 
4. Attendance Policy          7 
 
5. Textbooks and  other Reference material       7 
 
6. Continuous Evaluation         8 
 
7. Timely feedback to students        8
  
8. Feedback about Courses and Course review      9 
 
9. Grading           9 
 
10. Role of Teaching Assistants        10 
 
11. Lab Courses           10 
 
12. Project Courses          11 
 
13. Tutorials           11 
 
14. Instructor Conduct          12 
 
15. Honor Code           12 
 
16. Annexure 1 (Self – learning mode)       13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Version 2, Updated on August 1, 2021  Page 4 
 1. Class schedule  
 
Courses at IIT Gandhinagar (IITGN) are typically sched uled to run between 8 AM 
and 6:0 0 PM. All classes start 5 minutes past the hour and end on the hour (i.e., the 
first class is at 8:05 AM, and ends at 9:00 AM). It is expected that instructors will       
begin the lecture in a timely manner, and be punctual with the class start  and end 
times  (both in the offline and online modes of teaching) . This is important in order to  
ensure that students are not delayed for their next class.  This also provides the next 
instructor time to set up the class (in offline mode  of instruction) . Instructors must 
also ensure that students reach the class on time, and are encouraged to monitor 
punctuality of students.  
 
The time -table at IITGN is managed centrally. It is advisable that all courses be held 
during the time -slot assigned by the academic office. Any rescheduling of assigned 
time-slots may be done in consultation with the pre-registered/ registered students 
and the Dean / Associate Dean, Academic Affairs. Classes may be rescheduled after 
written consent has been obtained. Similarly, mid -semester and end -semester 
exams must be conducted within the assigned time -slot only.   
 
Each discipline is expected to slot at least one core course in the 8:05 – 9:00 AM 
time slot. This is important so that spillover of core courses into the afternoon slots is 
avoided and these slots can be better utilized for labs and elective courses.  
 
A 4 credit course typically involves 40 lecture hours over the semester. It is advisable 
to not miss any classes. If a class is missed due to the unavailability of the instructor, 
it should be compensated via a make -up class decided in consultation wit h the 
registered students so that the 40 lecture hours are maintained.  
 
2. Course Planning and Operation  
 
Thorough preparation is fundamental to effective and smooth operation of courses. 
Preparation begins with development of a detailed and rigorous semester -long 
course plan for each course. A course plan  typically includes course objectives, 
modes of student  engagement in the course, textbooks  and references , grading 
policies, academic integrity policies, and  a breakdown  of topics to be covered in 
each lecture . This course plan  is to be added in the timetable before registration and 
should also be discuss ed on the first day of class, so that they can make an informed 
decision about the courses in which they are enrolling. It is advisable to structure the 
course plan in accordance with the desired learning outcomes. It is recommended 
that learning outcomes be identified clearly in the course plan.  Further, it is advisable 
that the course is planned in such a way that there is continuous engagement of 
students and the course provides an immersive learning experience through 
assignments, projects, and other ha nds-on learning modules.  
  
 
 
 
 
Version 2, Updated on August 1, 2021  Page 5 
 The course plan must indicate the mechanisms to assess the understanding of 
students on the topics covered (homework, assignments, projects, reports, papers, 
quizzes, exams, assignments, etc.). Because students will be studying multiple 
courses during any given semester, information about the evaluation mechanisms 
for different courses may help them to prepare their study schedule in advance. The 
instructors ar e also encouraged to include  the dates of all evaluation components in 
the course plan - this way the semester is neatly planned out for the students. In 
addition, for courses run in online mode, the instructor s are  strongly encouraged to 
share the  video r ecordings of each lecture on the  classroom website. The feedback 
suggests that this step is crucial and very useful to the students.  
 
It is important that students in all disciplines get a sense of how the material they are 
studying is relevant in the “r eal world”. When preparing the course plan, faculty 
members are strongly encouraged  to think about real -life examples, demonstrations , 
and experiments that could be incorporated to give this sense to students. All 
demonstrations to be conducted during  class hours may be planned prior to the 
beginning of the course. The students are to be encouraged to attend, ask 
questions , and to enthusiastically learn from the demonstrations. To cultivate 
interest, the descriptions of demonstrations may be made available to the students 
beforehand.  In addition, if the demonstration involves a video recording, it would be 
beneficial if this recording is shared before or after the actual demo nstration . 
 
Faculty members are also encouraged to espouse active learning strategies and 
practices in their courses. These include an emphasis on learning -by-doing, 
numerical simulations, doing -before -learning and wherever possible, “making”. Such 
practices have been shown to enhance student learning through deeper 
engagement and more hands -on experiences.  In addition, the instructor may invite 
subject experts  for providing additional perspectives to enhance the in -class 
teaching -learning experience; these lectures are expected to be over and above the 
lecture hours  associated with the course .  
 
For courses that are taught by faculty from multiple disciplines (for example, 
Engineering Graphics, Thermodynamics, Fluid Mechanics, Solid Mechanics, etc.), it 
is expected that the course plan be developed jointly by all t he participating faculty 
members / disciplines. This may require extensive consultations and agreement on 
quizzes, assignments, tutorials, problem sets , and exams. These deliberations are 
expected to be held well before  the start of the semester, and a p eriodic review may 
be conducted over the semester.  
 
It is also important that students in such courses gain an understanding of a 
particular concept via exposure to problems from many disciplines. For instance, 
problems from Materials Science, Mechanical Engineering , and Civil Engineering 
may be used to enhance understanding of a concept in Solid Mechanics. This is to  
 
 
 
 
Version 2, Updated on August 1, 2021  Page 6 
 be discussed by the course instructors and tutors, and the course material may be 
prepared  accordingly.  
 
Similarly, for large courses th at involve multiple instructors and tutors (for example, 
Introduction to Life Sciences, World Civilizations, Computing, etc.), synchronization 
between the instructors and tutors is essential. Instructors and tutors are strongly 
encouraged to jointly plan t he entire operation of the course before the beginning of 
the semester. The tutors are expected to attend all the lectures. In addition, the 
instructors should ensure the weekly “course volume” match across sections so that 
the course remains properly sync ed across the groups.  It is advisable that the team 
of instructors and tutors meet on a weekly basis to ensure good coordination 
throughout the entire semester.  
 
Industrial visits are highly encouraged by the Institute. It is recommended that the 
course  plan include all planned industrial visits and expectations that would be met 
through such visits.  The enthusiastic participation of students is necessary to 
achieve the learning outcomes of industrial visits. Instructors must also ensure that 
there are n o last minute changes to the visiting schedule that is decided with the 
industry colleagues.  
 
The students may be unable to  have all their questions answered during the lecture 
or tutorial sessions due to limited time. Therefore, it is advisable to have  well-
publicized  office hours during which instructors,  tutors, and  TAs are available for 
consultation.  A large class could be broken up into many sections with an 
instructor/tutor/ TA in charge for each section.  
 
A full course must be taught by a singl e instructor. In situations where two or more 
faculty members must share teaching (as instructors), permission must be  sought in 
advance with full justification. Change of instructors for an ongoing course is not 
advisable. In exceptional circumstances, a change of instructor may be 
recommended by the discipline (with justification) and approved by the Dean, 
Academic Affairs.  In addition, it is desirable that faculty learn from each other with 
regards to best teaching practices. Thus, a discipline -specific (or interdisciplinary) 
meeting can be scheduled ahead of the semester to share views and opinions about 
teaching certain courses.  
 
Further, each discipline must ensure equitable distribution of course load across 
faculty over time. For instance, basic courses that have a large number of students 
may be rotated between faculty every couple of years or so. Similarly, large basic 
courses may be split into smaller sections as and when needed and possible to give 
faculty exposure to teaching basic courses an d to enhance student learning.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Version 2, Updated on August 1, 2021  Page 7 
 3. Learning Outcomes   
 
The success of the academic program depends on the ability of students to make 
connections between concepts across courses and developing an intuition towards 
applying these concepts in real -world situations. An effective way to design a unit of 
instruction is to then think about what students should know and  how they should 
effectively use that acquired knowledge. Instead of viewing learning outcomes as a 
determinant of efficacy of the course a t the end of the semester, faculty are 
encouraged to design the course such that learning outcomes at the end of each unit 
are clear a nd is thus an evolving concept . Specifying intended learning outcomes for 
students  will also enable effective design o f teaching and learning activities that 
might help students achieve those outcomes. Likewise, learning assessments should 
also be aligned with the intended learning outcomes. The knowledge of learning 
outcomes for each course may also be useful for the evo lution of the curriculum in 
the long run. Instructors are therefore encouraged to clearly spell out learning 
outcomes in the course plan, possibly in a modular fashion, preferably on a topic -by-
topic basis. To ensure students are on course to achieve the d esired learning 
outcomes, instructors might want to schedule additional (possibly online) office hours 
in addition to the regular ones.  
 
4. Attendance Policy  
 
It is recommended that the instructor follows an attendance and class participation 
policy. The  minimum attendance requirement, its weightage in grade evaluation if 
any, policy on make -up exams etc. should be communicated at the beginning of the 
course and should be included in the course plan. The students may also be made 
aware of the “Self -Learni ng Mode”, the information for which is provided in Annexure 
1. In case of extended absence by a student, the instructor may work with the 
student to develop a plan to make up for the missed course work . 
 
5. Textbooks and other Reference material  
 
A key feature of effective teaching is the selection of instructional materials that meet 
the needs of students and fit the constraints of the teaching and learning 
environment. As the students will likely be studying multiple courses during a 
semester, th ey may find it convenient to refer to a standard textbook for a course. 
Therefore, the instructors are strongly encouraged to follow standard textbooks by 
prominent author(s) in the field, and if possible, with additional resource material 
such as video le ctures by the author(s), extra problem sets, etc. Furthermore, 
instructors must develop a tradition of following the same book for an extended 
period of time, and frequent changes in the textbook must be avoided. The 
instructors should also ensure that mul tiple copies of the prescribed textbooks are 
available in the library prior to the beginning of the course. The library team can also 
help with the procurement of textbook for students at discounted rates.   
 
 
 
 
Version 2, Updated on August 1, 2021  Page 8 
 Students, particularly at the undergraduate level,  may need additional guidance 
beyond course material and classroom teaching. This can be provided by means of 
appropriate reference material. These references should be mentioned in the course 
plan, and efforts should be made towards making them easily ava ilable to students.       
 
6. Continuous Evaluation  
 
Instructors are free to select assessment methods of their choice, including but not 
limited to assignments, projects, quizzes, examinations, presentations, etc. However, 
performance of students must be tracked throughout the duration of the course. It is 
also preferable to have a mid -semester  and end -semester  examination as per the 
Institute schedule. Any departures from the institute schedule for the mid -semester  
and end -semester  examinations should be communicated in advance to the students 
and require permission of the Dean, Academic Affairs. Instructors may also ensure 
that the assessments are distributed uniformly throughout the semester. For 
example, the number of quizzes should be approximately the same before and after 
the mid -semester . Along similar lines, instructors must avoid clubbing too many 
evaluations towards the end of the semester.  
 
The weightage given to different assessment components should be fairly distributed 
and announced to the students at the start of the course. Any modification of the 
grading scheme or the weightage of components during the course must be avoided. 
Such modifications can possibly negatively influence  the study schedule of students . 
Makeup exams are discou raged except under extreme circumstances. Students 
must be made aware of the policies for makeup examinations by the instructor.  
 
For the examinations/assessments, there is a provision for providing compensatory 
time to students with Benchmark Disabilities. PwD students (with a minimum 40% 
disability) may be allowed compensatory time at the rate of 20  minutes per hour in all 
the examinations.  
 
7. Timely feedback to Students  
 
Students can immensely benefit from obtaining feedback on their performance in 
assignments, projects, quizzes, and examinations etc. in a timely manner. It is 
expected  that the assessments  are graded an d returned to students without any 
delay. The students must be given an opportunity to see each of t he graded 
assessments after grading has been completed . It is highly encouraged to hold 
special office hours  to provide feedback to students  and to clarify any doubts and 
answer any questions. Since the end -semester examination is generally the final 
point of evaluation for a course, it is advisable to share the results of all evaluations 
with each student  by the last week of the classes.  This will help in the identification 
and rectification o f any inadvertent mistakes in entry of marks before the grades are 
being finalized. Further, as explained in the Academic Affairs advisories, students  
 
 
 
 
Version 2, Updated on August 1, 2021  Page 9 
 must be given an opportunity to see their graded answer scripts of end -semester 
examination before submis sion of grades i.e. within 72 hours after the day of the 
end-semester examination. The instructor may therefore plan accordingly. In addition 
to the results of  the above assessments, the instructor is expected to regularly 
interact with  underperforming  students and provide them detailed feedback about 
their performance.  
 
8. Feedback from Courses and Course Review  
 
The views expressed by students can help the instructor know if the learning 
outcomes are being met from a student’s perspective, how student s perceive  the 
course material, the pace of instruction, etc. The mid-semester feedback and the 
detailed feedback collected  before  the end -semester examination are  shared with 
the instructors and tutors. The Instructor may take the above feedback into 
cons ideration while preparing the course plan and teaching the same course in the 
future.  
 
In addition, disciplines should encourage feedback from students in informal settings 
like discipline -level town hall meetings or open houses.  Discipline coordinators        
should further ensure that each course is reviewed at least once every three years.  
It is advisable that a schedule is established in order to minimize over -surveying 
stakeholders and to ensure that courses are reviewed systematically in a cycle. 
Course reviews should focus on the conduct of the course, appropriateness of the 
content , student engagement,  and assessment methods in order to achieve the 
learning outcomes, and the consistency and relevance of the objectives of the 
course with the academic pro gram.  
 
9.      Grading  
 
The instructor may take the help of teaching assistants in evaluating the 
assignments submitted by the students. However, the instructors are expected to 
evaluate the answer scripts of the examinations by themselves. The instructors are 
advised to prepare a grading key for all assignments, quizzes, and examinations etc. 
in order to ensure consistency in grading across all students. The instructor is 
generally free to use the grading policy of their choice with regard to weightage to 
different assessments ov er the semester. However, such a policy should be 
announced to the students at the beginning of the course; any modification of the 
policy during the course is discouraged. The broader grading system is common 
across the Institute and details on the same a re available in the Academic Affairs 
advisories. It is advisable to share the results of all evaluations with each student by 
the last week of  the classes.  This will help in the identification and rectification of 
any inadvertent mistakes in entry of marks before the grades are being finalized. 
Further, as explained in the Academic Affairs advisories, students must be given an 
opportunity to se e their graded answer scripts of end -semester examination before  
 
 
 
 
Version 2, Updated on August 1, 2021  Page 10 
 submission of grades . Grades are required to be submitted within 72 hours of the 
conduct of the end -semester examination of the course. If the grading for a particular 
course appears to be too liberal or too harsh, the Dean, Academic Affairs may flag 
the course to the Chairman, Senate, and a moderation of  grades may be requested.  
 
Though the instructor is responsible for all evaluations and the assignment of 
grades, it is strongly advised to involve the tutors of the course in the above -
mentioned activities.  It is also desirable that new faculty members t eaching for the 
first time be made aware of these practices by the discipline coordinator.  
 
10.     Role of Teaching Assistants  
 
The Teaching Assistants (TAs) are an important part of any course, and must be 
utilized properly so as to become an excelle nt resource to the students. For 
effectiveness, TAs must be informed about their duties prior to the beginning of the 
course. The TA allocation should be done at least 15 days before the 
commencement of the course . This will help in the overall planning of the course and 
ensure that the TAs are briefed and fully prepared and trained. The instructor should 
encourage the TAs to attend lectures and tutorials , so that they know exactly what is 
covered and can provide the right assistance to the students. However, TAs are not 
permitted to independently conduct lectures or tutorials (these must be conducted by 
faculty). TAs are also not permitted to grade the mid -semester and end -semester 
examinations. Graduate Teaching Fellows (GTFs), with prior approval, could be  
responsible for the conduct of the entire course  as an independent instructor or tutor . 
The instructor should ensure that the TAs perform their duties like grading of 
assignments, holding regular office hours, etc. in a regular manner and by respecting 
the Honor  code of the Institute.  
 
11. Lab Courses  
 
The graduate and undergraduate curriculum at the Institute contains a substantial 
number of lab courses to help students get an applied sense of theoretical concepts 
covered in lectures. Experiments and projects in these courses should be designed 
keeping in mind the following goals:       
      
● Develop intuition and deepen understanding of co ncepts.  
● Apply concepts learned in class to new, real -world situations.  
● Develop critical, quantitative thinking.  
● Develop experimental and data analysis skills.  
● Develop reporting skills (written and oral).  
● Practice collaborative problem solving.  
 
To ensure that lab exercises run smoothly, experiments must be carefully planned. 
The instructor and TAs must be present during the lab sessions. The TAs must be 
fully trained on the experiments and safety protocols, and in consultation with the  
 
 
 
 
Version 2, Updated on August 1, 2021  Page 11 
 instruct ors, should rehearse the procedure before the lab sessions.  It is desirable 
that the instructor makes sure all the TAs perform the experiments well in advance 
and are aware of all the scientific and technical (instrumentation) aspects of the 
experiment in order to guide the students effectively. If necessary, a separate 
workshop might be conducted by the discipline for all the TAs before the beginning 
of the semester so they step into their roles well prepared.  All safety protocols should 
be explained to the students at the start of the course. Student learning may be 
assessed via impromptu viva sessions, reports or other means. Brief discussions 
about the lab exercises during the lecture hours may further enable a better 
understanding of the theoretical c oncepts and also gauge student understanding.  
 
 
12. Project Courses  
 
Students typically undertake project courses (for example, IN 791, IN 792, CL 399, 
etc.) to gain research experience in a particular topic. To ensure effective guidance 
and student learning, an instructor may want to limit the number of project students 
that he/she is willing to supervise. It is also recommended that the students are 
informed about the project objectives, expectations and meeting schedule at the start 
of the semester . Since the students pursuing a project may be new to the research 
area, they will benefit from the regular meetings with the instructor. The instructors 
are expected to continuously evaluate students’ working on the projects.  The 
students should be encour aged  to make a presentation and submit a project 
report/term paper at the end of the semester on the subject matter along the lines of 
a typical scholarly publication.       
      
In addition to courses that are solely project -based, faculty members ar e encouraged 
to include small projects in regular courses as well - this ties in with the active 
learning environment that IITGN aims to provide and promote.  
 
13. Tutorials  
 
An effective tutorial session enables students to gain a better understanding and 
appreciation of the fundamentals and concepts. Students learn to apply the concepts 
and fundamentals taught in a course to solve a variety of problems. Tutorials  must 
not be converted into lecture hours. Tutorials are to be run by faculty or graduate 
teaching fellows (GTFs) approved for this purpose. Teaching Assistants should not 
conduct tutorial sessions. Tutorial batch sizes should be as small as possible ,      
certainly not more than 40.  
 
For multi -disciplinary courses (e.g, thermodynamics, solid mechanics, etc.), each 
concerned discipline is expected to contribute a tutor for a course. It is expected that 
each tutor brings in the respective discipline’s flavor into the course. A meeting of  
 
 
 
 
Version 2, Updated on August 1, 2021  Page 12 
 tutors should be scheduled well in advance, and tutorial (and possibly also 
assignment) problem sets should ideally be finalized before the start of the semester.  
 
A tutorial problem set may have sufficient problems of varying  degrees of complexity 
to meet student diversity. Simpler problems help to build the student ’s confidence, 
while complex problems challenge the student ’s thinking. Further,  wherever 
possible, the problems should have relevance to practical (or real world) applications 
so that the students can see the connection between concepts and applications.  
 
14. Instructor Conduct  
 
Instructors are expected to show civil and courteous conduct when interacting with 
students in the classroom or otherwise. It is important for instructors to recognize 
that any student performing poorly in a course, not attending class or facing other 
challenges still needs to be treated in a dignified and respectful manner. Instructors 
must attempt to understand students’ difficult ies, address them and bring them to the 
attention of all concerned stakeholders.       
      
Particular care and concern should be shown to differently -abled students who might 
have trouble grasping the subject material and whose pace of learning mi ght not 
match with the rest of the class. Consideration for this aspect should be provided, 
and if necessary, a separate mode of examination may be conducted in consultation 
with the student(s).  
 
15. Honor Code  
 
Instructors are encouraged to discuss the Honour Code (as provided in the Student 
Affairs Advisories) with the students at the beginning of the course. Faculty members 
may also:  
 
1. Create awareness to ensure that expectations regarding academic integrity 
are understood, and that students are held ac countable for conforming  to      
such expectations.  
2. Use good judgment in setting and communicating clear ground rules for 
academic work conducted under their supervision.  
3. Maintain proper protocols during the administration of examinations  
4. Avoid reusing  prior examinations in whole or in part to the extent possible.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Version 2, Updated on August 1, 2021  Page 13 
 ANNEXURE 1  
 
SELF -LEARNING MODE  
(As approved by the Senate in its 3rd meeting held on 19th July 2010)  
 
Regular attendance in lectures and tutorials is a key factor in enhancing student 
performance. The fully residential character of IITGN would be expected to correlate with 
greater attendance in the classroom. The Institute does not prescribe any attendance  policy 
and all decisions pertaining to attendance related issues are entirely left at the instructor’s 
discretion. The institute has a provision of study in self -learning mode bearing the following 
features:  
● Students absenting themselves for more than 3 classes during the first 3 weeks, or, 
more than 6 classes during the first 5 weeks to be declared to be in the “self -learning 
mode” for that particular course.  
● Such students will thereafter be free not to atte nd any more lectures of that particular 
course. Their names will be removed from the attendance sheet. They need not submit 
any assignments; if they do, those will not be graded. They need not appear in any 
quizzes or mid -semester examinations; if they do those too will not be graded.  
● The performance of such students will be evaluated on the basis of the end semester 
examination score alone. That is, their final examination score will be compared with that 
of the other students (who are not in self learnin g mode) and the grade will be awarded 
accordingly (see illustrative example below).  
● The parents of students going on the “self learning mode” are liable to be informed of 
this. In particular in cases of first year students and those in higher classes whos e CPI is 
below average.  
● The list of students going on the “self -learning mode” will be provided to the Scholarships 
Committee of the Institute, which will be free to use this input in deciding the award of 
scholarships for the next year.  
● In case of labor atory courses, every student is expected to attend all the laboratory 
sessions failing which they are liable to be awarded a Fail grade as applicable.  
● In case of medical or other emergencies, timely permission should be sought from the 
instructor and defi ciencies should be suitably made up.  
 
Illustrative Example:  
 
Assume that the evaluation of a course is based on assignments, quizzes, a mid -semester 
exam and an end -semester exam. Let us take the case of three students: student X is in 
self-learning mode ( and will therefore be evaluated only on the end -sem exam performance), 
while the other two students (Y and Z) are not. Now, X, Y and Z all get the same marks on 
the end -sem exam . However, Y and Z have also submitted assignments, taken quizzes, etc. 
Based o n their cumulative performance on all these, say the grade for Y at the end of the 
course is a C (because he/she did poorly on several evaluations) while the grade for Z is an 
A- (because he/she did well on most evaluations). Now the grade for student X, w ho is in 
self-learning mode, can be either a C, or an A -, or any grade in between. This is at the 
discretion of the course instructor.  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR CREDIT TRANSFER FROM ONLINE COURSES  
(As approved by the Chairman, Senate on 31st March,  2020)  
 
 
Objective : 
 
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs), which make university courses available to 
thousands of students, are disruptive, technology -driven learning platforms that are 
challenging traditional educational models.  With the ability to reach a large number of lea rners 
around the world, MOOCs have made a visible and largely positive impact on open education.  
 
Allowing students to learn via these platforms and get credit for it opens up the opportunity for 
new ways for students to access knowledge and develop their  skills. This in turn liberalizes 
their education and also forces traditional classroom learning to evolve. Numerous companies 
also recognize the value addition from, say, a Udacity nanodegree or a Coursera Capstone 
project. Additionally,  MOOCs  can be leve raged to enhance our own course offerings (e.g., by 
using flipped classrooms) and add to the richness of our overall catalogue.  In this context, the 
following is proposed.  
 
Features : 
1. Students at IIT GN may be encouraged to take courses on various online pla tforms  (see 
“Platforms” below) . 
2. Up to 16 credits worth of coursework for UG (B.Tech.) students and up to 8 credits worth 
of coursework for PG students ( M.Sc., M.A., M.Tech, Ph.D. ), completed via MOOCs , may 
be counted towards the graduation requirements.  
3. The MOOCs will be treated as simply having “Passed” or “Failed”. In other words, credits 
earned via MOOCs will not count towards a student’s  CPI. However, the total number of 
“Pass/Fail” credits over the entire coursework of a student in a program will be capped at 
16 for undergraduate  students and 8 for postgraduate  students (see “Pass/Fail 
Considerations”  below).  
4. Core courses will typically  not be allowed; MOOCs will count towards electives only. 
However, in exceptional circumstances or in case of certain  courses (for instance, 
Computing), the Chairman, Senate may permit that credits earned in core courses (or 
their close equivalent) via MOOCs be counted towards graduation requirements.  
5. MOOCs registered by a student during a semester will not count toward s the credit 
overload.  However, a student may not register only for MOOCs during a semester ; 
registration for some courses at the institute (with full fee payment) will be required . 
6. The institute may consider reimbursing part of the costs incurred by a stu dent towards the 
MOOCs upon presentation of the original course completion certificate  (see Financial 
Structure below) . 
7. Students on suspension may register for MOOCs and earn credit.  
 
 
 
 Details:  
 
1. Types of Courses:  
1. Faculty Sponsored:  These courses  will be  shepherded by IITGN faculty, and would 
be largely in his/her are a of interest . The “sponsoring” faculty will be responsible for 
coordinating course logistics, meeting with students periodically, organizing review 
sessions, conducting tutorials, solving doubts, coordinating with the original course 
instructor (when possible) for live interactions with the students, monitoring the 
conduct of exams for the course, submitting grades, etc.  
2. Courses done directly by students:  Students are free to choose their o wn courses on 
MOOCs (subject to the conditions  below ). These may be , for example,  in areas that 
are under -represented at IITGN in terms of faculty expertise. The responsibility of 
completing such  course s lies with the student.  
 
2. Platforms:  
A. Swayam – NPTEL  
1. All Swayam – NPTEL Online Certification Courses  will be included . 
2. NPTEL MOOCs have the advantage of localization and context, are generally taught 
by IIT / IISc / IIM / IISER / AIIMS faculty, include an on -site proctored exam, cost much 
less than other onl ine platforms and provide enhanced interaction opportunities with 
the actual instructors. The quality of course offerings on NPTEL has significantly 
improved over the years, more rigor has been added, and this continues to be a focus 
area for the NPTEL tea m. Thus, there are clear advantages to NPTEL MOOCs.  
3. NPTEL courses are typically  4 week, 8 week and 12 week long, and are offered in 
slots that are generally aligned with the IITGN semesters.  The 4-, 8- and 12 -week 
courses  will map onto  1, 2 and 3 credits respectively in the  IITGN system .  
 
B. Non-NPTEL platforms  
1. There is an extremely high level of heterogeneity in the nature, duration, expectations, 
format and logistics of MOOCs on other platforms such as Coursera, EdX, Udacity, 
etc. Yet, for the benefit of the students, MOOCs on these platforms may also be 
included towards the graduation requirements.  
2. The courses (and credits) on non -NPTEL platforms will be approved on a case -by-
case basis. A student wanting to include a course from these platforms will prov ide a 
justification on how/why a certain course can be mapped to an equivalent course at 
IITGN. The course and the student’s rationale will be vetted by the student’s Faculty 
Advisor and he/she will make a detailed recommendation to the Dean, A cademic  
Affairs  who will seek approval of the Chairman, Senate. This process must be 
completed before  the student registers for the course.  
3. Once a course on these non -NPTEL platforms has been approved, it will continue to 
remain approved for three years and no fr esh approvals will be needed for subsequent 
students wanting to take the same course.  
 
C. Additionally, each discipline may identify a set of top quality MOOCs in various domains 
independent of the platform on which they are offered  and seek approval from the  
Chairman, Senate for this set of courses. Students may then f reely register for these 
courses without having to go through the process mentioned in B2 above.   
 3. Financial Structure:  
1. Enrolment in NPTEL courses is typically free of cost, as is watching the videos and 
submitting the weekly assignments. However, t he registration for the  in-person 
proctored certification examination requires payment of  a nominal fee (currently about 
Rs. 1,000).  
2. The cost on other non -NPTEL platforms varies considerably.  
3. To begin with, students will be expected to pay the cost associated with the course on 
any platform. However, for faculty sponsored courses, this cost will be reimbursed to 
the students upon producing the course completion certificate.  
4. For courses that st udents do on their own, the costs will have to be borne by the 
students themselves.  
 
4. Pass/Fail Considerations : 
1. The institute currently provides students the opportunity to convert up to 2 courses in 
which they receive a non -fail letter grade to a “Pass” gr ade. As a consequence, the 
course still gets counted towards the graduation requirements, but is not included in 
the CPI calculation.  
2. The grades for the MOOCs will also be treated similarly, i.e. the student will be 
considered as having passed or failed th e course. No letter grade will be awarded.  
3. The total number of credits that a UG student can claim under the Pass/Fail option  will 
be capped at 16  (combined across courses done online and at the institute) .. 
Likewise, the total number of credits that a PG student can claim for this benefit will be 
capped at 8  (combined across courses done online and at the institute) . However, no 
student may convert more than two courses done at the institute to Pass/Fail (see 
examples below).  
4. Examples:   
i. A UG student successfully completes four 3 -credit courses online. These, by 
default will be considered as “Pass” and thus will be counted in the 16 credit 
limit. The student can then convert a non -Fail letter grade of only one more 4 -
credit course done at t he institute to a “Pass” grade.  
ii. Another UG student does not take any courses online. This student can 
convert a non -Fail letter grade to a “Pass” grade  in a maximum of two courses 
done at the institute . 
iii. A PG student successfully completes one 2 -credit cou rse online. This student 
can utilize the “Pass/Fail” option for two 3 -credit courses or one 4 -credit and 
another 2 -credit course done at the institute.   
iv. A PG student does no course online. The student can convert a non -Fail letter 
grade to a “Pass” grade in a maximum of two courses done at the institute.  
 
The provision for credit tr ansfer from online courses will  be made available to all students with 
effect from Semester II of 2019 -20. Acad emic Affairs Advisory 36(Version 1.0, January 20 15)                                                             Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR PAID SUMMER INTERNSHIP TO B.TECH, M.SC. AND MA STUDENTS 
(As approved by the BoG in its 13th meeting held on 14th March 2014) 
 
There is provision for a number of paid summer internships within India for t he B.Tech students after 
completing their 4 semesters in the Institute. The norms on the scheme are given below.  
 
1. B.Tech. students who have successfully completed their first 4 semesters in the Institute are 
eligible to apply for paid summer internship within India. The applicant is expect ed to have an 
excellent academic performance and impeccable record of interpersonal relations. In 
meritorious cases, however, the support may be provided to students after their first year or 
third year as well. 
2. This scheme will provide support to a student only during summer for the duratio n of internship 
being 8 – 12 weeks.   
3. This financial assistance can support the expenses related to travel as per the norms and also 
provide a lump-sum amount per month to support accommodation and boarding (food) 
expenses. The lump-sum amount payable to the student during the visit will  be up to Rs. 
3000/ - per week depending upon the place of visit and other sources of support. The  dates of 
travel will be included in counting the number of weeks. 
4. The amount to be provided by way of financial support will be subject to ceiling of Rs. 35,000/- .  
5. A committee will be appointed by the Director to review all the applications and m ake 
appropriate recommendations for approval.  
6. All recipients of such Institutional support may seek additional support from other sources 
including the organization of intended visit overseas, and/or, meet a part of the ex penditure 
through personal finances/loans. The students may also contact the faculty member s, wh o 
work in collaboration with the host institute/organizations/industry, to seek partial support 
through their projects or professional development accounts.  
7. The Institute may agree to pay any fees or charges to the host university/ institute on a case to 
case basis. In case a student decides to do academic registration at the host 
university/institute, he/she can request to the Institute for transfer of credits in li eu thereof.  
8. Half of the expenditure on this scheme will be covered from the MHRD grants and the 
other half from the “Excellence Funds” as approved by the Board of Governors from 
time to time, such as donations, interest income of the endowment, and overheads and 
savings of the projects. 
9. The number of internships will be subjected to availability of funds. Student Affairs Advisory 0 8 (March 2020)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
STUDENT AFFAIRS  
 
NORMS ON PHYSICAL EDUCATION COURSE  
 
(As approved by the Senate in its 4th Meeting held on 2nd December 2010)  
 
IIT Gandhinagar believes in the development of a balanced personality of its students  and 
actively encourages  the students to participate in various sports and games, for which good 
facilities are made available to the students.  
 
To re -introduce the first year students to the culture of sports and games after the arduous JEE 
preparations, during which period they hardly get time for sports, the UG curriculum at IITGN 
has compulsory course on Physical Education during both the first and second semesters with 
P/NP credit. The course comprises various components of a regular physical education  program, 
such as physical exercises, games, yoga and sports. Since 2009 -10 academic year, the Institute 
has been expecting the students to participate in the PE activities on all five days of the week, 
and expects about 80% minimum attendance of the stude nts.  
 
The following mode of operations for the PE course will be followed : 
 
1) The Institute will invest further on PE activities and organize to conduct the Physical 
Education sessions on all 7 days of the week.  
 
2) The Institute will continue to expect that s tudents crediting PE will be engaged in sports 
and games 5 days per week.  
 
3) The students will have the option to choose any 5 days out of the 7 days for attending PE 
101 / PE 102. They may of course choose to participate on more than 5 days in a week.  
 
4) Dean  (Professor in Charge) of Student Affairs will be the official course instructor for 
PE101 / PE102 course and will monitor the progress of the students and award grades 
with the assistance of concerned faculty member in charge of sports activities and the 
sports coaches/ instructors.  
 
5) If a student for some reason is forced to miss several sessions of PE in a week (for 
instance, due to sickness), he/she may make up the attendance by participating on more 
than 5 days in other weeks.  
 
6) Pass/ No Pass grade will be awarded in the PE course on the basis of 80% attendance 
requirement. The Institute will STRICTLY enforce this requirement and any student who 
is reported to have participated in less than 56 sessions (80% of the 70 expected  sessions; 
5 sessions per week  for 14 weeks in a semester) in a semester will be awarded NP grade 
and will have to repeat the course ab initio in a following semester.   
 
7) If a substantial number of the first year students are deeply involved in organizing a 
major cultural or technical e vent (such as BLITHCHRON and AMALTHEA) and a 
justifiable case is made out by the student leadership that such students must miss a 
reasonable number of PE sessions in the larger interest of the Institute, the Dean of 
Student Affairs may award a reasonable number of “tokens” to the concerned student 
leaders prior to the event. Upon completion of the activity, the concerned student leaders Student Affairs Advisory 0 8 (March 2020)  Page 2 
 will recommend allocation of these “tokens” to the first year students in ratio of their 
engagement for approval of the D ean of Student Affairs.  
 
8) While counting attendance and awarding the grades in PE, the “tokens” will be counted 
as equivalent to having attended the equal number of sessions.  
 
9) The Institute has now been conducting a thorough physical checkup  of all first ye ar 
students. In case a student is found to be suffering from a serious ailment such that he/she 
is advised by the Institute doctor to avoid strenuous physical activities, the Institute may 
either (a) defer the PE requirements for a later semester for that student, or  (b) allow the 
student to carry out an “equivalent” amount of social service under supervision of a 
faculty member.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research and Development Advisory 08 (Version 2.0, June  2023 ) Page 1 of 4  
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
POLICY FOR GOVERNANCE, MANAGEMENT AND  
COMMERCIALIZATION OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY OF  
THE INSTITUTE   
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 37th meeting held on 13 May 2023 ) 
 
 
The Institute approved its Int ellectual Property (IP) policy during the 15th meeting of 
the Board of Governors held on 02 December 2014. Since then, the Institute has 
made significant progress in research and development  and is focusing on 
commercialization and technology transfer . Therefore, to augment the IP policy, the 
Board of Governors of the Institute in its 37th meeting held on 13 May 2023 has 
approved the following ‘Policy for Governance, Management and Commercialization 
of Intellectual Property’ . This shall override all existin g polic ies in this regard . 
 
The Policy  
Article 1: Ownership  
 
1.1 Inventions:  
a. Rights and title to all potentially patentable inventions conceived and/ or 
created wholly or in part by IITGN personnel (faculty, students, or staff) in 
the course of their academic/  research or other work -related 
responsibilities or with more than incidental use of Institute’s resources, 
belongs to the Institute except in the following conditions:  
(i)  IP created under sponsored research agreements specifying 
ownership of IP  
(ii)  IP created as part of consultancy assignments specifying the 
ownership of IP  
(iii)  IP created outside their normal job description with no more than 
incidental use of Institute resources  
 
1.2 Literary/Expression -related work:  
a. Rights and title to such creations, including literary works, software, music, 
cinematography, sound, and other rights covered under the Copyright Act 
of India, 1956, and amendments thereof, where applicable, that are 
created in IITGN with the use of significant Institute resources shall be 
assigned t o and owned by IITGN except in the following conditions:  
(i)  Teaching/ Course material created for teaching purposes during the 
author’s engagement with IITGN.  
(ii)  Thesis, dissertation (in this case, the ownership is jointly held by the 
student creator and the s upervisor concerned)  
(iii)  Where publication of scholarly material in question might bring the 
institute into disrepute.  
(iv)  Content created through externally sponsored work.  
 Research and Development Advisory 08 (Version 2.0, June  2023 ) Page 2 of 4  
 1.3 General Conditions of Ownership for Invention and Literary/ Expression 
related work  
a. IITGN retains the rights for research exemption and experimental use of 
patents, design rights, and under the fair use of copyrights and trademarks 
on an institute -wide preputial license to further its objective of academic 
and research promotion.  
b. IITGN g ets the automatic right to display innovations, trademarks, and 
copyright material in soft and hard forms.  
c. Any use of the IITGN logo shall require a prior written permission of the 
institute to prescribe the terms and conditions of the usage.  
d. All inventor s/creators are required to ensure that at the time of submission 
of invention disclosure, they have filled in the percentage contribution. This 
information would, among other aspects, will determine the ratio of sharing 
any revenue received from the commer cialization of the said technology 
amongst the inventors.  
 
Article 2: Disclosure  
 
2.1 Inventors, authors, and contributors are required to promptly disclose all 
potential IP/ inventions/ copyright either in whole or in part as soon as 
conceived or reduced to p ractice by members of faculty and staff (including 
research staff, doctoral students, students, and visiting scholars) of the 
Institute in the course of their Institute related activities.  
2.2 The disclosure shall be done through the Invention Disclosure form  prescribed 
and updated from time to time by the Institute. The Institute shall identify the 
relevant statutory mechanisms such as Patents, Design, Copyright, 
Trademark, IC layout Plant verity, etc., to protect the invention and evaluate 
the IP filing as p er the process set forth in the policy.  
 
Article 3: Evaluation and Administration  
 
3.1  Office of the Dean R&D shall provide guidance, support, and resources for 
facilitating the protection and deployment of Intellectual property.  
3.2 The Dean of R&D, with sp ecific approval of the Director, will be the authorized 
signatory on behalf of the Institute on the agreements related to IP filing, 
administration, and technology commercialization. Other employees may sign 
these agreements on behalf of the Institute only  on the specific authorization 
of the Director.  
3.3 The Dean R&D shall constitute a suitable Committee to evaluate the Invention 
disclosures and to ascertain 1) ownership, 2) determining whether the 
proposed invention is worthy of protection, and 3) having a r easonable 
chance of commercialization.  
3.4 The institute may engage the services of reputed patent attorneys/ law firms 
for filing and prosecution of IP matters.  
3.5 Foreign filing: Institute may consider an invention for filing a patent application 
in a foreign t erritory through different legislative options such as PCT, Paris Research and Development Advisory 08 (Version 2.0, June  2023 ) Page 3 of 4  
 Convention, or direct route. Before the filing, a detailed assessment of the 
potential of the invention, its application, and the purpose of filing in a 
particular country be prudently asses sed. 
3.6 If Institute deems an IP un -commercialize, the Inventors/ originator have the 
right to request the release of IP under the terms agreeable to the Institute 
and Originators.  
 
Article 4: Commercialization  
 
4.1 IITGN shall have the sole discretion with resp ect to the commercialization of 
an IP.  IITGN shall market the IP and identify potential licensee (s). The 
licensing shall be done through the office of Dean R&D, IITGN, which will 
handle the evaluation, marketing, negotiations, and licensing of the entire  
institute -owned IP.  
4.2 Where an IP is subject to an external agreement with a third party (for 
example, an Industry sponsor), the Institute shall make decisions consistent 
with an agreement signed with such sponsor prior to undertaking such work.   
4.3 The inst itute shall make decisions concerning commercialization as it deems 
appropriate and shall make reasonable efforts to keep the Inventor(s) involved 
and informed of its commercialization efforts.  
4.4 In some cases, Institute may utilize the services of third -party/ specialized 
agencies or individuals for effective deployment of the IP.  
4.5 While negotiating the licensing, in any contract between the licensee and 
IITGN, the Institute shall seek indemnity from any legal proceedings including 
without limitation manufact uring defects, production problems, design 
guarantee, upgrades, debug obligations, and the content created. The policy 
also supports the need to indemnify IITGN personnel built into the license 
agreements for sponsored research and consultative work.  
 
Article 5: Revenue Sharing  
 
5.1  Where the Institute generates royalties as a consequence of commercializing 
an IP, the return on IP (aggregate income and capital received by the Institute 
after deduction of taxes and costs) will be shared with the Institute and 
Inventor(s) as described below.  
Income limit  Inventor’s 
share  Institute’s 
share  IP Service 
Account  
For income of up to Rs. 2 crores  70 20 10 
For additional income exceeding two 
crores and less than seven crores  50 40 10 
For further additional incom e 
exceeding seven crore  30 60 10 
 
5.2  The Institute shall have the right to modify the Royalty Sharing as it may deem 
appropriate.  Research and Development Advisory 08 (Version 2.0, June  2023 ) Page 4 of 4  
  
Article 6: Conflict of Interest  
 
6.1  The inventor(s) are required to disclose a potential conflict of interest while 
unde rtaking any IP -related activity. If the inventor(s) and/or their immediate 
family have a stake in a licensee or potential licensee company, then they are 
required to disclose the stake they and/or their immediate family have in the 
company. An IITGN licens e to a company in which the inventors also have a 
stake and management role shall be subject to the approval of the Dean R&D 
taking the above consideration into fact.  
 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR
 
Campus Safety Committee
 
LABORATORY SAFETY: DAILY CHECKLIST
 
Name of the Lab and Room Number:
 
 
 
Sl. No.
 
Checks
 
YES
 
NO
 
Remarks
 
01
 
Are the students and assisting staff in
 
required PPE’s?
 
 
 
 
02
 
Are corridors, gangways, doors etc.
 
kept clear of obstacles?
 
 
 
 
03
 
Is storage racking/ shelving secure
 
and not overloaded?
 
 
 
 
04
 
Are heavy items stored at lower
 
levels to prevent risk from falling and
 
manual handling?
 
 
 
 
05
 
Is there a suitable means by which
 
higher shelves can be accessed e.g.
 
step stool or ladder?
 
 
 
 
06
 
Is there unobstructed access to:-
 
 
 
 
 
Fire Extinguishers/ Emergency exits;
 
 
 
 
 
Electrical isolating switches;
 
 
 
 
 
Gas Isolation valves/ regulators
 
 
 
 
 
Emergency showers/ Eye wash/ First
 
Aid boxes?
 
 
 
 
07
 
Is waste disposed off regularly &
 
properly?
 
 
 
 
08
 
Are hazardous chemicals disposed off
 
as per pollution control norms?
 
 
 
 
09
 
Are benches cleaned on at least a
 
daily basis?
 
 
 
 
10
 
Is spillage cleaned up immediately?
 
 
 
 
11
 
Are cup boards/ filing cabinets/ desk
 
drawers kept closed when not in use?
 
 
 
 
12
 
Are cables/ hoses secured and not
 
presenting hazards?
 
 
 
 
13
 
Is emergency contact number list
 
displayed in lab properly?
 
 
 
 
14
 
What to do ‘in case of fire’ procedure
 
(SOP) displayed in lab?
 
 
 
 
15
 
Is fire extinguishers’ gauge needle on
 
Green mark? Are they sufficient?
 
 
 
 
16
 
Are the gas cylinders chained?
 
 
 
 
 
17
 
Any other abnormal observations?
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date:
   Signature
 
  
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar  
 
Waste Segregation Guidelines  
 
IITGN is committed to become a “zero waste campus”. In order to achieve the same cooperation and support of all the 
residents and their families is envisaged.  
It is mandatory for all residents to segregate their waste as per the following guidelines and hand over the segregated 
waste to the housekeeping staff. They serve the housing area every morning and cover all blocks between 8.10 AM and 
10 AM. Please ensure that the waste is p roperly segregated, otherwise it may not be accepted by the housekeeping staff.  
Organic Waste / 
Biodegradable Waste  Recyclables / Dry 
Waste  Landfill / Trash  Bathroom waste  
GREEN BIN  BLUE BIN  RED BIN  BLACK BIN  
Vegetable and fruit peels, 
leftover food, bones and any 
food items.  
 
(Do not use plastics for lining)  Dry and clean paper and 
plastic; wrappers, packaging 
material, PET bottles.  
 
(All such waste must  be clean 
and dry)  Ice cream cups, wet 
and food -
contaminated plastic 
and disposables.  Sanitary napkins, diapers, 
used waxing strips, hair, 
used ear buds or anything 
contaminated with blood.  
PLEASE KEEP IN MIND  
 E- Waste such as batteries, old phones, cables, chargers etc. is to be stored separately.  
 Broken glass items should be stored separately in a bag. Don’t mix it with any other waste and hand it over 
safely to Housekeeping staff.  
 Expired and unused medicines can be deposited in the bins provided in the Dispensary.  
 Avoid using disposable plates, tumblers, glasses and spoons.  
 Do not dump mixed was te anywhere in the campus.  
 Bringing purchased items in plastic bags is highly discouraged; instead, always carry and use cloth bags while 
shopping.  
 
Note: - In case, you miss to handover the properly segregated wastes to Waste Collection Carts you can drop the 
 same in the common use dustbins placed in front of Block -07 across the walking pavement besides the 
 Organic Farmhouse boundary(caged area). But ensure that the segregated waste is carried in plastic bins / 
 buckets (avoid  carrying them tied in plas tic bags) and is properly put in the respective bin.  
 Academic Affairs Advisory 63 (Version 1.3, March 2024)                          Page   1 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  ADVISORY ON MINORS  (As approved by Senate in its 61st meeting held on  15th November 2022 and updated in its 66th/67th meetings)  IIT Gandhinagar provides a variety of options for additional learning to undergraduate students including the opportunity to pursue minors in other disciplines.   A student admitted from AY 2022-23 can receive a minor in another discipline/focus area, if they complete a minimum of 20 additional credits of courses specified by that discipline/focus area group, over and above the requirements of the base programme. Two open electives from the base programme, if it qualifies, may be counted in the 20 additional credits which are needed for a Minor for this student group.   Students admitted before AY 2022-23 can receive a minor in another discipline, if they, in addition to the requirements of the base level BTech degree, complete 20 credits of courses from another discipline which enhance their core competence in that discipline. One of the open elective courses of base programme, if it qualifies, may be counted towards Minor, in which case the requirement of open electives will reduce to 12 credits.  The Institute currently offers minor in the following areas/disciplines:   Sl. No. Minor 1 Artificial Intelligence 2 Automobile Engineering 3 Biological Engineering 4 Chemical Engineering 5 Chemistry 6 Civil Engineering 7 Cognitive Science 8 Computer Science and Engineering 9 Data Analytics 10 Design 11 Earth Sciences 12 Electrical Engineering 13 Humanities and Social Sciences 14 Management 15 Materials Engineering 16 Mathematics 17 Mechanical Engineering 18 Physics 19 Robotics 20 Safety Engineering 21 Sustainable Development    Academic Affairs Advisory 63 (Version 1.3, March 2024)                          Page   2 Courses Specified by the Discipline/Focus Area Group   A. Minor in Robotics [Ref: Senate 2020.4.15]  ● For minors in Robotics, the following courses are permitted to be counted towards the minor (as long as they are beyond the required curriculum of the individual student’s programme) subject to the condition that at least one out of ME 639 and ES 408 must be completed.  Course Code Current Title of the Course ME 639 Introduction to Robotics ES 408 Mechatronics ES 332 Control Systems ME 322 Synthesis and Analysis of Mechanisms ES 321 Dynamics and Vibration ES 613 Modern Control Theory ES 616 Digital Control Systems EE 645 3D Computer Vision ES 637 Mathematical Foundations for Comp. Vision and Graphics  ES 642 Control of Nonlinear Dynamical Systems ES 641 Electronic Instrumentation  ● This area tends to be a project-heavy, and up to 8 credits of independent project courses or special topics courses may be considered as part of the minor based on the recommendation of the appropriate Head of Department and Dean of Academic Affairs.                 Academic Affairs Advisory 63 (Version 1.3, March 2024)                          Page   3 B. Minor in Sustainable Development  ● For minor in Sustainable Development, students should take 20 credits of courses from the list given below. This should include courses from at least two different thematic areas (Water; Pollution & Waste Management; Energy; Environment/ Biodiversity/ Earth Systems).  Course Code Current Title of the Course Thematic Area CE 605 Remote Sensing of Land and Water Resources Water CE 611 Advanced Engineering Hydrology Water CE 634 Air Pollution Control Engineering Pollution & Waste Management CE 637 Infrastructure Systems: Planning and Management Water CE 691-VI Special Topics in Civil Engineering: Domestic Wastewater Engineering (Treatment and Reuse) Pollution & Waste Management CE 691-VII Special Topics in Civil Engineering: Engineering Practices in Drinking Water Treatment Pollution & Waste Management EE 426 Electric Vehicle Technology Energy EE 691-V Special Topics in Electrical Engineering: Regulation of Electric Sector Energy EE 691-VII Special Topics in Electrical Engineering: Economics of Regulation in India Energy EH 602 River Morphology and Ecology Water EH 605 Modelling of Earth System & Sustainability Environment/ Biodiversity/ Earth Systems EH 608 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Development Environment/ Biodiversity/ Earth Systems EH 612 Ocean and Global Change Water EH 691 Data Analysis for Earth System Sciences Environment/ Biodiversity/ Earth Systems ES 632 Energy Systems Energy ES 635 Water Quality Engineering Pollution & Waste Management ES 663 Smart Renewable Energy Systems Energy ES 665 Advanced Transportation Electrification Technology Energy HS 515 Politics of the Environment Environment/ Biodiversity/ Earth Systems IN 304 Ancient Indian Technology Environment/ Biodiversity/ Earth Systems            Academic Affairs Advisory 63 (Version 1.3, March 2024)                          Page   4 (Applicable for students admitted from AY 2022-23)  C. Minor in Computer Science and Engineering [Ref: Senate 2023.4.12]  The courses specified by the Department of Computer Science and Engineering for a minor in Computer Science and Engineering are as follows:   § ES 242: Data Structures & Algorithms I (4 credits) will be mandatory for a minor in Computer Science and Engineering except for students who are pursuing a BTech with an AI Major. For students who are pursuing a BTech in AI Major, ES 242 is a mandatory requirement for their AI Major.  § Additionally, at least two core courses of Computer Science and Engineering from the list given below (which are not a requirement of the base programme) must be taken.   Course Code Current Title of the Course ES 214 Discrete Mathematics ES 204 Digital Systems TBD Computer Organization & Architecture TBD Operating Systems CS 201 Theory of Computing TBD Software Tools and Techniques Lab TBD Computer Networks CS 329 Foundations of AI: Multiagent Systems  § Other two courses can be any from CS or other courses prescribed by the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, including the ones above.  § At most one CS 299/399/499 course can be counted towards the requirement of a minor in Computer Science and Engineering. Students are usually expected to take project courses after completing Data Structures & Algorithms I and at least one more CS course.    Academic Affairs Advisory 63 (Version 1.3, March 2024)                          Page   5 D. Minor in Artificial Intelligence [Ref: Senate 2023.5.7]  The courses specified by the Department of Computer Science and Engineering for a minor in Artificial Intelligence are as follows:   § CS 303: Mathematical Foundations for AI (4 credits) will be mandatory for a minor in Artificial Intelligence.  § Additionally, at least two core courses of Artificial Intelligence from the list given below, which are not a requirement of the base programme must be taken.   Course Code Current Title of the Course ES 204 Digital Systems ES 242 Data Structures & Algorithms I ES 244 Signals, Systems & Random Processes ES 245 Control Systems ES 335 Machine Learning CS 201 Theory of Computing CS 328 Introduction to Data Science CS 329 Foundations for AI: Multiagent Systems TBD AI Software Tools & Techniques TBD Computer Organization & Architecture   § Other two courses can be any from discipline-specific electives of AI/selected other courses, including the ones above.  § At most one CS 299/399/499 course can be counted towards the requirement of a minor in Artificial Engineering. Students are usually expected to take project courses after completing at least two AI courses.  IITGN Campus Processes  
Last updated: 3 June 2022  
Page 1 of 3  
  
1. What is the process of allotment of house at the  Institute?  
Process for house allotment  
○ Send an email request to the House Allotment  Committee 
(h  ouseallotment@iitgn.ac.in ). 
 
Process for moving into the house  
○ The concerned official will contact for this process after the allotment is  completed.  
○ In case of any queries, send an email to the Estate Office  (estateoﬃce@iitgn.ac.in ). 
 
Process for vacating the house  
○ Send an email request to the Estate Office  (estateoﬃce@iitgn.ac.in ). 
○ The concerned official from the Estate Office will visit and guide for this  process.  
2. How to issue furniture available at the Institute or  purchase 
new furniture?  
Issue of Furniture  
○ Send an email request to  furniture@iitgn.ac.in . 
○ Requests may include issuing of tables, chairs, sofas, white board, soft  board, 
poster boards and writable paint/film  etc. 
 
New Furniture request  
○ Raise a PPRF for approval and procurement, Necessary template documents  and 
guidelines can be downloaded from  here. 
3. How to reserve a Guest House room, Institute vehicle,  or 
community  spaces?  
Process for Guest House Booking (Rooms)  
○ Download the Guest House reservation form ava ilable  here. 
○ Send the filled and approved form to  hospitality@iitgn.ac.in  at least 48 hours  in 
advance of guest arri val time.  
 
Process for Vehicle Requisition  
○ Download the vehicle requisition form available  here. 
○ Send the filled and approved form to  hospitality@iitgn.ac.in  at least 48 hours in 
advance of guest arrival  time.  
 
Process for reservation of Community Spaces  
○ A list of available spaces and prevailing rates are available  here. 
○ These include: Hostel Mess Terrace, OAT, Central Arcade spaces, Guest House 
Open Lawn Area and  halls.  
○ For booking, please send an email to  hospitality@iitgn.ac.in  at least 48 hours  in 
advance.  
 
Process for Meal Order / catering for official events  
○ Download the meal order form available  here. 
○ Send the filled and approved meal order form to  hospitality@iitgn.ac.in  at least  48 
hours in advance of the  event.  IITGN Campus Processes  
Last updated: 3 June 2022  
Page 2 of 3  
 4. What is the process for allotment of space (e.g. for office,  labs, 
post-doc seating)?  
○ To request a desk for postdoctoral fellows, fill the  online  form. 
○ To request a desk for visitors, send an email request to  sunitamenon@iitgn. ac.in . 
○ For other requirements, send an email to  s pace.allocation@iitgn.ac.in . 
5. How to purchase Institute  memorabilia?  
○ The available memorabilia items and rates are listed  here. 
○ Send your purchase requests by email to  memorabilia@iitgn.ac.in . 
6. How to reserve auditorium/classroom a nd open  spaces?  
Reservation System for Auditorium or Classroom  
 
Internal Booking  
○ Use google calendar to reserve auditoriums and  classrooms.  
○ Guidelines for booking are available  here. 
○ Send an email to  classroomservice@iitgn.ac.in  for any  queries.  
 
External Booking  
○ Download the reservation form from  here. 
○ Send the filled and approved form to  hospitality@iitgn.ac.in  at least 48  hours 
in advance.  
Reservation System for Open Spaces 
Internal Booking  
○ Use google calendar to reserve academic open  areas.  
○ Available spaces: Samvad, Pradarshani, Vidya Chhaya, Vishwangan, 
Sandhya Chhaya, Srujan, Sammelan, Vishram and Darpan. (A map showing  the 
locations is a vailable  here). 
○ Guidelines for booking are available  here. 
○ For a ny queries, send an email to  hospitality@iitgn.ac.in . 
7. Whom to contact for animal management related  issues?  
○ An advisory on animal management is available  here. 
○ For any queries, send an email to Animal Management Committee  amc@iitgn.ac.in . 
8. How to obtain vehicle  stickers?  
○ Fill the  online application  form. 
○ The General Admin section will intimate you once the vehicle sticker is ready  for 
pickup (kindly ensure you provide all the data correctly and upload all the nec essary 
documents  properly).  
9. How do we pay electricity & gas  bills?  
○ Dues of all the housing occupants are directly deducted from the  salary.  
○ Non-emergency helpline number of SGL is  1-800-3097879.  
○ In case of emergency Sabarmati Gas can be contacted at 704 -307-1000  / 
1-800-2333810  (24x7).  IITGN Campus Processes  
Last updated: 3 June 2022  
Page 3 of 3  
 10. How to lodge regular maintenance  complaints?  
○ Use the maintenance portal - https://maintenance.iitgn.ac.in . 
11. Whom to contact for guidance on AC installation  in 
housing?  
○ Send an email to  aee1.electrical@iitgn.ac.in . 
12. How to get address proof for Passport/Aadhaar/PAN  card?  
○ Non-teaching Staff can write an email to the JR, Admin  (dradmin@iitgn.ac.in ). 
○ Teaching Staff can write an email to AR, Faculty Affairs  (ar.fa@iitgn.ac.in ). 
13. Whom to contact for hostel rooms and all hostel  matters?  
○ To apply for hostel  accommodation:  
○ fill this online form  (internal)  
○ fill this  online form  (external)  
○ To vacate hostel accommodation fill this  online  form. 
○ Contact person from hostel team is Mr. Darshan Patel  (darshan@iitgn.ac.in ). 
14. How to make requisitions for minor  work?  
○ Such works include partitioning of office/lab spaces, additional  electrical/Internet 
points,  etc. 
○ Download the minor work requisition form from  here. 
○ Send the filled form to  aee1.electrical@iitgn.ac.in  and aee1.civil@iitgn.ac.in . 
15. How to know more about the  campus?  
○ A number of publications covering different aspects of the campus are  available 
on the campus website - https://campus.iitgn.ac.in . 
○ Campus advisories are available  h ere. 
16. Where can I send general  feedback?  
○ Send an email to  feedback@iitgn.ac.in  for feedback on any matter relat ed to  the 
Institute.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 17 (Version 1.0, June  2014 )                                                 Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
DUAL APPOINTMENTS OF FACULTY  
(As approved by the BoG in its 13th meeting held on 14 March 2014)  
 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 13th meeting held on 14 March 2014 
approved  the following mechanism for  dual appointment of faculty members . 
  
a) Faculty members will continue to be selected for specific discipline/  department.  
b) The Standing Committee of the Institute for the faculty affairs can provide the 
faculty, based on his/  her interest and m erit, a joint association with another 
discipline/ department for a given period (say five years).  
c) This association can be reviewed every 5 years for further extension.  
d) The faculty member may not get additional remuneration for this association but will 
be expected to participate in teaching, research and service activities of both the 
disciplines/  departments.  
 
The Standing Committee on faculty affairs considered the above decision of the Boa rd 
and decided on the following implementation mechanism:   
 
a) Applications be invited from those faculty members, who are interested in joint 
appointments in other disciplines stating the proposed contributions in teaching 
and research by a certain date (August 15, 2014 in the first instance).  
b) Application s received for joint appointments be referred to the concerned 
disciplines for feedback.  
c) The applications along with feedbacks received are to be considered by the 
Standing Committee for final decision.    
Thesis defense guideline  
In view of the COVID -19 situation, MTech theses may be defended online. This is a temporary measure being put in place until 
in-person defense becomes feasible. Please note the following:  
As per previously approved norms, there should be a gap of at least 6 days between the date of thesis 
submission and date of thesis defense.  
The supervisor should make a formal announcement of the thesis defense to all relevant stakeholders (with a 
copy t o academics@iitgn.ac.in ) on the day of thesis submission by the student (thus automatically ensuring a 
gap of 6 days between the announcement and defense date). The link for participating in the seminar should 
be shared in the announcement email.  
lf a com mittee member's remote connection fails and he/she is not able to reconnect, a separate interaction 
session with that member may be scheduled at a later time.  
Recording of the MTech thesis defense is not necessary.  
The thesis examination report is expected to have the original signatures of the committee members. In 
case any member is unable to sign the report physically, he/she may endorse the thesis submission over 
email. You are required to attach copies of such email approvals with the thesis ex amination report.  
Procedure for final thesis submission after defense  
Submit ONE hardbound copy (signed by the supervisor) to the Library.  
Send the final PDF of the thesis to librarian@iitgn.ac.in , with a copy to your supervisor, mtechthesis@iitgn. 
ac.in and academics@iitgn.ac.in . Please keep the subject of the email as "Final M.Tech. Thesis (Roll No.: 
<Your Roll No>)".Please make sure that the contents are hyperlinked for quick navigation. It would be nice if 
you could hyperlink the references also.   
 
 
Faculty Affairs Advisory 2 2 (Version 1.0, August 2018)  Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
PROCESS OF GRANTING PAY LEVEL 13A1 ON COMPLETION OF 3 YEARS AS  
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR GRADE I AT PAY LEVEL 12  
(As approved by the BoG in its 24th meeting held on 27 July 2018)  
 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 24th meeting held on 27 July 2018 has 
approved the following process for granting Pay Level 13A1 on completion of 3 years 
as Assistant Professor Grade I at Pay Level 12 (equivalent to PB3 to PB4 of 6th 
CPC).   
 
1. Upon completion of 3 years at  the Institute in Pay Level 12 a faculty member is to 
submit a faculty profile providing their contributions and achievements for 
consideration by the Assessment Committee.  
2. For the purpose of counting 3 years, (a) time spent by the faculty member in Pay 
Level 12 (Grade Pay 8,000 in 6CPC) under contract will be counted but (b) time 
on any significant leave (other than vacation, casual leave, special casual leave 
and earned leave) will not be counted.  
3. In the interest of transparency, faculty profile will be placed in the library for 
review and feedback by any faculty member of the Institute.  
4. The Assessment Committee will consider performance of the faculty member, 
including any feedback from the faculty.  
5. The Standing Committee on Faculty Affairs will consid er recommendations of the 
Assessment Committee for its decision. Three scenarios are likely depending on 
the performance:  
a. The concerned faculty member is awarded pay up gradation from the date of 
eligibility, that is, on the date he/she completes 3 years a s per para 2 above.  
b. The concerned faculty member is awarded pay up gradation after he/she has 
completed 4 or more years.  
c. The concerned faculty member is advised to further improve the performance 
and reapply for pay up gradation.  Academic	Affairs	Advisory	57	(Version	1.0,	June	2022)																									Page	1	of	2	INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  Norms for Interim Sessions for Course Offerings  (As approved by the Senate in its 41st meeting held on 17th February 2020)  Background:  IIT Gandhinagar follows the semester system in which courses are offered in two semesters that run from August to November and January to April. A few courses are also offered through a separate Summer Term from mid-May to early-July, primarily to help students clear their backlogs.   Given the institute’s increasing emphasis on active, experiential learning, there is a need to create a separate vehicle for courses to run in an immersive and intensive manner. Such a format is often followed when projects are the primary form of learning, for example, in Design schools. It allows students to dedicate their entire effort to project work, without being distracted by the load of other courses. Specifically, in the context of IITGN, such a mechanism will also allow the institute to leverage more effectively some Visiting Faculty, who are at the Institute for a short duration such as a month, but are only able to offer 1-credit short courses at the moment. In this context, the following is proposed.  Proposal:  1. The institute will develop 3-week “Interim Sessions” to run between the regular semesters, i.e. during the Summer and Winter breaks.  2. The primary thrust of the Interim Sessions will be to leverage opportunities for intensive, creative and experimental courses that are most effectively conducted in immersive, project-oriented, studio, field or travel modules. 3. Innovative 2- or 3-week long courses that meet for 4 to 6 hours per day will be offered during these Interim Sessions. 4. These courses will typically be electives and offered for credit (see details below), and IITGN students will be able to count credits earned from such courses towards their graduation requirements.  5. The Chairman, Senate will approve Interim Session courses upon recommendation of the Dean, Academic Affairs.  Credits:  1. Since courses in the Interim Sessions will run in an immersive, studio style format, the expected faculty-student engagement will be higher than usual - about 60 hours for 4 credits. Thus, a 3-week course that requires faculty-student engagement for at least 4 hours per day from Monday to Friday, will give students the opportunity to earn 4 credits. Likewise, a 2-week course that runs at least for 6 hours per day from Monday to Friday will also yield 4 credits. 2. Credits earned via these courses, besides being counted towards graduation requirements, will also count towards the Honors and Minors requirements. 3. Courses will typically be of 3 or 4 credits. Any 2-credit course proposals may be considered for approval on a case-by-case basis.   Academic	Affairs	Advisory	57	(Version	1.0,	June	2022)																									Page	2	of	2	Eligibility:  1. All IITGN students will be eligible to register for courses during the Interim Sessions. 2. Students from other academic institutions in India as well as abroad may also be allowed to register for such courses. These Visiting Students will receive transcripts for their work from IITGN, but will need to determine from their home institutions if the credits earned will transfer or count toward their graduation requirements. 3. Students may register for only one Interim Session course at a time. This course should not overlap with any other course (for example, a summer term course).  Fees:  1. For students of Indian academic institutions including IITGN: Summer tuition rates applicable to IITGN undergraduate students (currently Rs. 5000 per credit) will apply. 2. For international students: USD 400 per credit. 3. Hostel, meals and other charges will be extra, and as per prevailing norms.  4. Additional expenses related to field visits, travel, etc., if applicable, will be borne by the student. 5. IITGN students that are provided tuition fees waiver during the regular semesters will be provided tuition fee waiver for the interim session.  6. Tuition fee waivers in other deserving cases may be given by the Director based on the recommendation of the Dean, Academic Affairs.  Other Details:  1. Courses that are best studied in a slower, progressive manner and require time to assimilate cannot be offered in the Interim Sessions. Rather, courses that run during the interim sessions are generally expected to be hands-on, immersive and experiential.  2. These courses will follow the usual grading pattern and system of letter grades. Students will however be permitted to convert the letter grades to “Pass/Fail”, subject to the usual norms of the “Pass/Fail” option. 3. IITGN faculty teaching courses in the Interim Session may receive an honorarium (or Professional Development funds) in lieu of the teaching load.   Expected Benefits:  The Interim Sessions provide an opportunity to: 1. Leverage Visiting Faculty from India and abroad more deeply by conducting full-fledged innovative courses, which will be beneficial and of greater appeal to students than current short courses, which do not count toward their graduation requirements and which often conflict with their schedule. 2. Attract international and other Indian students who may be interested in some modules, which could be eligible for credit at their home institution. 3. Enable IITGN to expand its global exchange program by creating course opportunities for foreign institutions, which their students can avail.  4. Collaborate with study abroad programs of overseas institutions both to host their students or support their faculty-led study abroad programs.  
Academic Affairs Advisory 26 (Version 2.0, December 2023)                                               Page 1   INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR NORMS FOR INDEPENDENT RESEARCH PROJECT,  INDEPENDENT RESEARCH SEMINAR, INDEPENDENT TEACHING  AND SEMINAR COURSES FOR PhD STUDENTS  Out of the minimum credits through coursework, PhD students must complete a minimum of 12 credits through project-based courses. Each unit of this project course [independent research project (IN 791)/ independent research seminar (IN 792)] will have three credits, and four of such courses must be registered during the programme. Project-based courses may include activities including lab-based experiments, independent study with a faculty, design study, book review etc., that involve at least 100 hours of overall engagement for a 3-credit course by the student in a given semester. For students admitted from Semester II, 2023-24, the project-based course(s) will be independent research project (IN 793)/independent research seminar (IN 794)/independent teaching (IN 795), each of 2 credits. § Independent Research Project [IN 791 (3 credits)/IN 793 (2 credits)] - An activity-oriented course where students need to perform one or more of the followings: experimental work, simulations, coding, analysis, design, data collection and interpretation, structured laboratory sessions, etc.  § Independent Research Seminar [IN 792 (3 credits)/IN 794 (2 credits)] – A seminar course based on detailed literature review in the chosen topic of the course, which may include reading books, journal articles, conference proceedings, reports, etc. § Independent Teaching [IN 795 (2 credits)] –The independent teaching course will include mentorship by a faculty member, successful completion of the teaching certification programme and independent teaching of at least two classes (of 1 hour 20 minutes each). The mode of evaluation will be developed and announced by the departments. The focus and objective of project-based courses for PhD scholars is to promote the following: 1. Provide breadth to knowledge base and capability to understand variety of topics beyond their thesis topic as well as exploring different areas beyond their specialization. Promoting students to come out from their comfort zone and explore something different.   2. Working with various faculty members during these courses gives a broader spectrum to their personality as a more rounded professional. For example: a Civil Engineering student in Geotechnical Engineering research area does one IN course in mathematical type problem (structures) in one semester, and then explores composite materials (in Mechanical Engineering) in other semester with another faculty member.  3. In spirit, it is an attempt to expose the student to various dimensions (different topics, different sub-streams, different disciplines, different professors, different methods of learning including project based and literature review based). The take-home from these courses will surely be significantly different from one student to another, based on his/her capability to allow himself/herself to flow in new content without the fear of moving from his/her comfort zone.   Course Work Expectations:  ● Each unit (3 credits) will require about 100-120 hours of overall engagement in a semester, which includes meeting, reading, preparations, report writing, etc. For 2 credit units, the overall expected engagement is about 80 hours.   
Academic Affairs Advisory 26 (Version 2.0, December 2023)                                               Page 2   ● A student can register for a maximum of one unit (3 credits/2 credits) of IN 792/IN 794/IN 795 in a semester. IN 791/IN 793 Independent research projects can be registered for any number of units in a semester, irrespective of IN 792/IN 794/IN 795 registration.  ● It is NOT necessary to work on an innovative topic with tangible outcomes or create new knowledge. Learning from existing knowledge or performing repeat analysis and design is perfectly fine. It is fine to work on writing skills and presentation skills by following an old series of work, gain hands-on experience through a set of experiments, learn new skills like machining, instrumentation, creating surveys, sampling, etc. ● The topic chosen in IN 791/IN 792/IN 793/IN 794 courses should not be part of thesis work in any manner. In case of any overlap with thesis work in future, the student is expected to submit request for dropping these credits by submitting a detailed explanation.  ● For example, in one unit of IN 792/IN 794 it is sufficient for a student to read 8-12 journal articles related to the topic and summarize those with their own interpretations and good understanding. Similarly, one can scale the expectations in IN 791/IN 793 project work. Course Adviser:  ● The students should choose a course advisor in the area of their interest in consultation with the programme advisor. It is suggested to be with different course advisers on different topics each time, but not necessary. ● The students claiming multiple project-based courses towards graduation requirements should work with at least one course advisor who is not from the primary area of their thesis work. ● Students should not have the same course adviser for more than two units of these courses.  ● The students should meet and choose course advisor for each unit within first week of the semester and submit the name(s) to the course coordinator of their own department. Evaluation: ● The students are expected to work on IN 791/IN 792/IN 793/IN 794 throughout the semester by distributing their work on weekly basis. The assessment will be primarily based on the amount and consistency of effort. ● The students are expected to present their work at least two times in a semester in front of an evaluation committee or a faculty group, one in the middle of the semester and the other towards the end of the semester. ● The mode of evaluation for IN 795 will be developed and announced by the departments. ● The course coordinator of the department will finalize grade(s) of each student in consultation with the committee/group and the course advisor(s) of the student and submit it to the academic office before Examination II.  Seminar Course (IN 798) - PhD students, admitted from July 2013 onwards, are registered for one-credit seminar course in each semester till Semester I, 2023-24. It is different from the IN 792/IN 794 Independent research seminars.  ● The expectation of IN 798 is that each student will attend at least one seminar/lecture per week on an average, i.e., 15 hours of such sessions. It includes faculty candidate seminars (of any department), invited lectures in the department or outside, lectures/seminars outside the institute, popular lectures, interaction sessions with invited speakers, student seminars, etc.  ● At the end of the semester, the registered students fill up a claim form with details of the attended seminar/lectures, which requires minimum 15 hours’ worth of genuine entries to get Pass grade.  ● IN 798 is not more a requirement for PhD students from Semester II, 2023-24 (including students admitted prior to Semester II, 2023-24).  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 1   INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR NORMS FOR BTECH PROGRAMME  [As approved by a) the BoG in its 18th meeting held on 16 May 2016, 34th meeting held on 28 April 2022, 39th meeting held on 19 January 2024 b) Senate in its 61st meeting held on 15th November 2022, updated in the 63rd/64th/68th meetings of the Senate]  The curriculum of the undergraduate programme at IIT Gandhinagar focuses on students’ overall development and step-by-step value addition. The aim is to   § impart a broad-based education  § emphasize strong fundamentals and substantial interdisciplinary exposure  § provide an opportunity to explore a wide spectrum of courses in each semester  § provide sufficient design exposure  § promote planning and organization, and encourage team work  § sensitize students to their socio-cultural context  § equip students for future leadership, transcending conventional disciplinary barriers  § emphasize need for lifelong learning and relearning.  The BTech programme is divided into two distinct but compatible parts called Institute level curriculum and Discipline specific curriculum. Each student is required to go through the Institute level curriculum, irrespective of his/her chosen branch of specialization. It consists of a package of compulsory courses, besides a few elective courses. The Discipline specific curriculum consists of a set of compulsory courses, electives, and project work.  All students admitted to the first year of undergraduate (BTech and BTech-MTech) programmes are called at least one week before the rest of the batches. First, they go through a Foundation Programme of about four weeks (five weeks for students admitted till AY 2022-23) followed by regular semester activities of about twelve weeks.   A student is required to pass the prescribed minimum courses of the curriculum for his/her programme and complete the minimum credits requirement of 169-175 for the BTech degree according to the structure prescribed by each discipline.   A. BTech Curriculum (Applicable for students admitted from AY 2022-23)  1. Typically forty hours of study load (mind-space time) of a student may be counted as equivalent to one credit i.e. in a four credit course, a study load of 160 hours is expected from the student in a semester, including contact hours.  2. All BTech students are required to complete 28 credits of courses under the Humanities and Social Sciences basket, including two mandatory Writing courses namely HS 191: Introduction to Writing I (2 credits) and HS 192: Introduction to Writing II (2 credits).  3. In addition to the Writing courses, the Humanities and Social Sciences courses which are mandatory for undergraduate students are Economics (4 credits), Introduction to Philosophy (4 credits) and World Civilizations and Cultures (4 credits). In the future, baskets of courses may be offered as an alternative to the mandatory Humanities and Social Sciences courses. Rest of the 12 credits will be covered through Humanities, Social Sciences or Management electives, with 4 credits (2 courses of 2 credits each) worth of courses from a General Education Basket. Some of the courses which could  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 2  be considered under the General Education (GE) Basket include courses on Cultural Expression, Performing Arts, Theatre, Fine Arts, Sports etc. The courses under the mandatory General Education Basket (up to 4 credits) will have Pass/Fail grade and not an usual letter grade. In cases where a student fails to clear the Foundation Programme, they may clear an additional 4 credits worth of GE courses for graduation. Note: Credit for courses offered under the General Education Basket cannot be counted towards the graduation requirements for students who are admitted before 2022-23. 4. All students are required to complete 8 credits worth of courses from the Science Basket, which will have courses from Chemistry, Cognitive Science, Earth Sciences and Physics. The parent discipline of the student may specify one course out of the two courses which a student is required to complete. The courses which are covered under the Science basket will be updated from time to time and the currently approved list, along with courses specified by the parent disciplines, is shown in Annexure I. In addition, all students are required to complete an additional 4 credits of Basic Science electives, which may also include courses from the Science basket. [Note: All Science Basket courses can also be considered as Basic Science electives. However, all Basic Science electives are NOT Science basket courses.] 5. Three mathematics courses [MA 103: Calculus of Single Variable & Linear Algebra (4 credits), MA 104: Ordinary Differential Equations (2 credits), MA 203: Numerical Methods (2 credits)] will be mandatory for all undergraduate students. Further, a student will be required to complete 2 credits worth of courses from the Mathematics Basket, which may include courses on Calculus of Several Variables, Complex Analysis, Integral Transform, Optimization Theory and Partial Differential Equations to name a few. The course to be completed from the Mathematics basket may be specified by the parent discipline of the student. All Mathematics courses are envisioned to be offered in the active learning mode, with significant use of visual learning tools, programming assignments etc. 6. To give students a research experience during their undergraduate programme, all undergraduate students are required to complete a project course.  The student will be free to do this Open Project Course (4 credits) in the area/discipline of their choice, any time after the first year of their undergraduate programme. The Institute will also explore the possibility of creating open project courses on entrepreneurship under the aegis of IIEC. This project course may also be offered at the IITGN Research Park, in collaboration with industry partners.  7. In addition to the Open Project Course, students are free to register for project courses within or outside their parent discipline. These project courses can be at Level 2 (XX-299), Level 3 (XX-399) or Level 4 (XX-499) and up to 16 credits of such project courses can be counted towards the graduation requirements.  8. Students will have the opportunity to do Open Electives worth 16 credits. 9. Four semesters of Physical Education (0 credit) courses will be mandatory for all undergraduate students.  10. Other mandatory Institute level courses include  a) ES 101: Engineering Graphics (3 credits) b) ES 112: Computing (3 credits) c) ES 113: Data Centric Computing (3 credits) d) ES 114: Probability, Statistics and Data Visualization (3 credits)  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 3  e) ES 115: Design, Innovation and Prototyping (5 credits)  f) ES 116: Principles and Applications of Electrical Engineering (5 credits)  g) ES 117: The World of Engineering (2 credits) h) ES 118: Materials for the Future (3 credits) i) ES 243: Biology for Engineers (4 credits) j) BS 192: Undergraduate Science Laboratory (3 credits) 11. Discipline specific courses will be for 62-64 credits. The details of discipline specific courses are shown in Annexure II. 12. In addition, a comprehensive viva voce is conducted every semester. It is a mandatory pass/fail activity with grade P/F. 13. Two sample academic paths are given below for Institute level courses. Students are free to choose their own path, in consultation with their faculty advisors.  
 
   
 
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 4    B. BTech Curriculum (Applicable for students admitted before AY 2022-23)  The distribution of credits as well as sample academic plans for students admitted before 2022-23 are shown in Annexure III.   C. Additional Learning  There is a provision of Honours and Minors available to students as an add on to the base level BTech degree. The students will initially take admission in BTech programme and will generally register for the minimum requirements of this base level programme. Besides registering for a number of elective courses as part of their programme requirement, the students will also be permitted to register for additional courses and collect some additional credits. Students will not be required to declare the type of elective or additional learning at the time of registration or during the course. They will keep collecting these credits by successfully completing different courses during their four years of stay by following their own planned academic path and aspirations in mind. At the time of graduation, the students will claim their basic degree of BTech, or BTech with Honours, or BTech with Minor(s) or BTech with Honours and with Minor(s) based on the collected credits. The requirements of Honours and Minors are given below.  (Applicable for students admitted from AY 2022-23) 1. A student can receive a BTech (Honours) degree if they complete a minimum of 20 additional credits of courses specified by the parent discipline, over and above the requirements of the base programme. This should include at least one project course in the area of the parent discipline, in addition to the open project course. Further, two open electives from the base programme, if it qualifies, may be counted in the 20 additional credits which are needed for Honours. 2. A student can receive a Minor in another discipline/focus area, if they complete a minimum of 20 additional credits of courses specified by that discipline/focus area group, over and above the requirements of the base programme. Two open electives from the base programme, if it qualifies, may be counted in the 20 additional credits which are needed for a Minor. Please refer to the advisory on Minors for more details about minors, including currently available minors and list of courses specified by 
 
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 5  disciplines (if any). [Note: For students pursuing multiple minors or honours and minor, a maximum of two open electives from the base programme may be counted in the additional credits needed for minors and/or honours.]  (Applicable for all other students)   1. Honours: In addition to the requirements of the base level BTech degree, the students will complete 20 credits of courses which enhance their core competence in their discipline. It is possible that a course, which is not generally offered by the same discipline but helps the students deepen their understanding in the core discipline, may also be considered for Honours with the approval of the DPC and the DOAA. For Honours, the student will be required to complete 08 credits of BTech projects related to the discipline. One of the open elective courses of base programme, if it qualifies, may be counted towards Honours, in which case the requirement of open electives will reduce to 12 credits.  2. Minor: In addition to the requirements of the base level BTech degree, the students will complete 20 credits of courses from another discipline which enhance their core competence in that discipline. It is possible that a course, which is not generally offered by that particular discipline but helps the students deepen their core understanding in that discipline, may also be considered for Minor with the approval of the DPC and DOAA. One of the open elective courses of base programme, if it qualifies, may be counted towards Minor, in which case the requirement of open electives will reduce to 12 credits. [Note: For students pursuing multiple minors or honours and minor, a maximum of one open elective from the base programme may be counted in the additional credits needed for minors and/or honours.]  D. Academic Load  § A student will normally register for 20 - 24 credits in a semester as per the respective programme. Each course carries a weightage in terms of credits depending upon the study load on the student and/or the number of contact hours (lectures and tutorials) and/or laboratory hours.  § There is no limit on the total number of project courses which a student can register during their programme. However, a maximum of 16 credits of project courses can be counted towards graduation requirements, irrespective of whether the student claims for BTech or BTech with Honours.   § A student may register up to a maximum of 28 credits in a semester. However, Faculty Advisor may specify a lower limit than 28 credits.  § A student who is placed on Guided Progress Scheme (GPS) can register for a maximum of 21 credits. For detailed norms about GPS scheme, please refer Academic Affairs Advisory on IWS.  § A student with CPI of 7.0 or above may be recommended by the Faculty Advisor to take an overload of one course (up to a maximum of 32 credits) subject to the approval of Chair, SAPC. Any relaxation to the minimum CPI requirement for overload may be considered by the Chair, SAPC based on the recommendation of DPC.  § Similarly, Chair, SAPC may allow a student to take a reduced load. Also, a deficient student may be required to take a reduced load as per the provisions/recommendations of SAPEC/Faculty Advisor/SAPC/ decisions of the Senate.  § A student can register for one-credit short courses in addition to any of the above-mentioned limits of academic load. These courses are not counted as overload. These  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 6  credits are not considered in graduation requirements; however, the successfully completed courses with their titles will be mentioned in the proficiency transcripts.    § A student is required to seek approval for academic overload/underload.  § No student is allowed to register for more than 10 credits during the summer term.  E. Early Termination  (Applicable for students admitted from AY 2023-24)  § Any student failing to earn a minimum of 30 credits within one year from his/her start of the first year programme (either due to admission or due to restart) should start his/her programme afresh or exit the programme. A student needs to secure a passing grade for earning the credits registered for the course.  § If the programme is restarted, then the credits earned and semesters registered prior to restart will not be carried over.   § Restart will be permitted only once.   (Applicable for students admitted in AY 2022-23)  § Any student failing to earn a minimum of 21 credits at the end of Term II can either apply to start his/her programme afresh or will have to exit the programme.   § If the programme is restarted, then the credits earned and semesters registered prior to restart will not be carried over.    § The restart will be permitted only once.  § Upon restart, students must successfully complete at least 50% of the credits at periodic intervals (at the end of Semester I and Semester II) to continue in the academic programme or else his/her admission will be terminated and no further chance shall be given.   § The student need not repeat FP100: Foundation Programme upon restart. Instead, any GE course of equivalent credit may be taken.   § The maximum period allowed to complete the programme will be six years (the first year or first semester if repeated will not be counted).  (Applicable for students admitted before AY 2022-23)  § Any student failing to earn a minimum of 26 credits at the end of first two registered (active) semesters can either apply to start his/her programme afresh or will have to exit the programme.   § If the programme is restarted, then the credits earned and semesters registered prior to restart will not be carried over.   § If a student fails to earn 26 credits in the first two semesters but successfully completes 15 or more credits in the second active semester, then only the first semester will be repeated i.e. the student will be deemed to have fresh start from the second active semester.   § The restart will be permitted only once.    
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 7  § Upon restart, the student must successfully complete a minimum of 12 credits at the end of first semester and a minimum of 26 credits at the end of first two semesters, or else his/her admission will be terminated and no further chance shall be given.   § The student need not repeat FP100: Foundation Programme upon restart. Instead, any HSS course of equivalent credit may be taken.   § The maximum period allowed to complete the programme will be six years (the first year or first semester if repeated will not be counted).  F. Duration of the Programme   (Applicable for students admitted from AY 2023-24)  § For all programmes, there will be no maximum permissible duration to complete the requirements of the programme. However, at any time, credits earned older than eight years will be deemed expired and will not count towards the graduation requirements.   § After X years + 3 semesters, a request from the student is needed to extend the programme on a semester by semester basis, where X is the nominal period for a given programme (4 years for BTech/BSc and 5 years for BTech-MTech).   § This is applicable for students admitted from AY 2023-24. However, students from previous batches may opt for being considered under the above norms for duration of the programme.    (Applicable for students admitted before AY 2023-24)  § For the BTech programme, the maximum duration permitted, within which the programme must be completed, is 12 semesters. If a student desires to finish his/her BTech programme in seven semesters, by successfully completing the other graduation requirements, he/she may be permitted to do so.     
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 8  Annexure – I  Science and Mathematics Basket Courses (Applicable for undergraduate students admitted from AY 2022-23)  List of Courses in the Science Basket Course Code Course Title PH 201 Introduction to Electrodynamics PH 202 Introduction to Quantum Physics PH 404 Molecular and Crystal Physics PH 503 Quantum Mechanics I PH 505 Classical Electrodynamics PH 507 Statistical Mechanics PH 508 Classical Mechanics PH 509 Computational Physics PH 510 Condensed Matter Physics CH 203 Fundamentals and Applications of Spectroscopy  CH 204 Organic Chemistry in Everyday Life CH 302 Electrochemical Science and Engineering CH 401 Food Chemistry CH 511 Quantum Chemistry CG 503 Fundamentals of Cognitive Psychology CG 505 Fundamental Neuroscience EH 605 Modeling of Earth System and Sustainability EH 608 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Development EH 303 Introduction to Earth Sciences EH 612 Ocean and Global Change EH 602 River Morphology and Ecology EH 304 Drone Data Acquisition Processing and Interpretation  Science Basket Courses specified by the Disciplines:  § BTech/BTech-MTech Electrical Engineering: PH 201 is mandatory.  § BTech Integrated Circuit Design and Technology: One course among PH 510, Physics of Materials (to be approved) is mandatory.  § BTech Materials Engineering: One course among PH 201, PH 202, CH 203 is mandatory.  § BTech/BTech-MTech Mechanical Engineering: One course among PH 201, PH 202, PH 404, PH 503, PH 505, PH 507, PH 508, PH 509, PH 510, CH 203, CH 204, CH 302, CH 401 is mandatory.   List of Courses in the Mathematics Basket Course Code Course Title MA 204 Introduction to Partial Differential Equations  MA 205 Calculus of Several Variables MA 206 Introduction to Complex Analysis     
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 9  Annexure – II  Discipline Specific Curriculum (Applicable for undergraduate students admitted from AY 2022-23)  BTech Curriculum – Artificial Intelligence [From AY 2023-24]  § The curriculum for BTech in Artificial Intelligence will have discipline specific core courses for 44 credits and discipline specific elective courses for 20 credits.   § The discipline-specific core courses are:   o Data Structures & Algorithms I (4 credits) o Signals, Systems & Random Processes (4 credits) o Digital Systems (4 credits) o Theory of Computing (4 credits) o Mathematical Foundations for AI (4 credits) o Control Systems (4 credits) o Software Tools & Techniques for AI (4 credits) o Computer Organization & Architecture (4 credits) o Foundations of AI: Multiagent Systems (4 credits) o Machine Learning (4 credits) o Introduction to Data Science (4 credits)  § Some of the discipline-specific elective courses are categorized as CSE Basket courses. Courses under the CSE Basket, offer students background in core EECS topics. A minimum of 4 credits of courses under the discipline-specific elective courses are to be taken from this basket.   § Online courses and CS project courses (CS 299/399/499) can contribute at most 8 credits as AI discipline-specific electives.  § The tentative list of discipline-specific elective courses is shown in the table below. This list is expected to be dynamic and more courses may be added in the future.  Course Code Course Title TBD Reinforcement Learning TBD Game Theory ES 413 Deep Learning ES 645 Optimization Methods in Machine Learning ES 661 Probabilistic Machine Learning TBD Knowledge Representation and Reasoning TBD AI and Ethics CS 613 Natural Language Processing EE 645 3D Computer Vision ES 659 Computer Graphics TBD Speech Technology ES 615 Nature Inspired Computing TBD Robotics TBD AI for Sustainability TBD AI for Earth Sciences TBD AI for Biological Engineering CSE Basket ES 214 Discrete Mathematics CS 327 Compilers CS 301 Operating Systems CS 433 Computer Networks  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 10  EE 323 Digital Signal Processing TBD Software Engineering CS 432 Databases  § A sample academic path for the proposed BTech in Artificial Intelligence is given at Annexure II-A.  BTech Curriculum – Chemical Engineering  § The curriculum for BTech in Chemical Engineering will have discipline specific core courses for 42 credits and discipline specific elective courses for 20 credits.   § The discipline-specific core courses are:  o Thermodynamics (3 credits) o Chemical Process Calculations (3 credits) o Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics (3 credits) o Process Fluid Mechanics (3 credits) o Heat Transfer (3 credits) o Chemical Reaction Engineering I (3 credits) o Chemical Reaction Engineering II (3 credits) o Separation Processes I (3 credits) o Process Dynamics & Control (3 credits) o Integrated Chemical Engineering Lab-I (3 credits) o Separation Processes II (3 credits) o Process Synthesis, Design & Simulation (4 credits) o Transport Phenomena (3 credits) o Integrated Chemical Engineering Lab-II (2 credits)  § Students will be free to choose discipline-specific electives from a basket of courses, which broadly cover the following thematic areas:  o Novel & Improved Materials (Advanced Materials)  o Process Engineering & Safety  o Bio-Processes & Pharmaceuticals  o Energy & Sustainability  § A sample academic path for the curriculum for BTech in Chemical Engineering is given at Annexure II-A.   BTech Curriculum – Civil Engineering  § The curriculum for BTech in Civil Engineering will have discipline specific core courses for 42 credits and discipline specific elective courses for 20 credits.   § The discipline-specific core courses are:  o Mechanics of Solids (4 credits) o Earth Materials & Processes (2 credits) o Geospatial Engineering (3 credits) o Structural Analysis (4 credits) o Fluid Mechanics (4 credits) o Sustainability & Environment (3 credits) o Hydrology & Hydraulics (4 credits) o Design of Steel Structures (4 credits) o Soil Mechanics (5 credits) o Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures (5 credits)  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 11  o Construction Technology & Management (4 credits)  § The discipline-specific elective courses are divided into two baskets namely Design/Applications Basket and General CE Electives Basket.   § Twelve credits of courses under the discipline-specific elective courses are to be taken from the Design/Applications Basket.  § Eight credits of courses under the discipline-specific elective courses are to be taken from the General CE Electives Basket.  § The tentative list of courses in the elective baskets are shown in the table below. This list is expected to be dynamic and more courses may be added in the future.  Basket Course Code Course Title Design/ Applications CE 313 Environmental Science and Engineering CE 314 Geotechnical Engineering CE 404 Transportation Engineering TBD Irrigation Engineering and Hydraulic Structures General CE Electives CE 307 Masonry Design ES 404 Networks and Systems TBD Data Sciences for Earth Systems CE 633 Infrastructure Systems: Planning and Management TBD Advance Design of (Steel/Concrete) TBD Advance Courses in Transportation Engineering  § A sample academic path for the revised curriculum for BTech in Civil Engineering is given at Annexure II-A.  BTech Curriculum – Computer Science & Engineering  § The curriculum for BTech in Computer Science & Engineering will have discipline specific core courses for 36 credits and discipline specific elective courses for 26 credits.   § The discipline-specific core courses are:  o Data Structures & Algorithms I (4 credits) o Discrete Mathematics (4 credits) o Digital Systems (4 credits) o Computer Organization & Architecture (4 credits) o Theory of Computing (4 credits) o Operating Systems (4 credits) o Software Tools and Techniques (4 credits) o Foundations of AI (4 credits) o Computer Networks (4 credits)  § Some of the discipline-specific elective courses are categorized into baskets namely Theory & Algorithms Basket and Systems Basket. At least 8 credits of courses under the discipline-specific elective courses are to be taken from each of these two baskets.    § Online courses and CS project courses can contribute at most 8 credits as discipline electives.   § The tentative list of discipline-specific elective courses is shown in the table below. This  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 12  list is expected to be dynamic and more courses may be added in the future.  Course Code Course Title - All CS Elective Courses ES 654 Machine Learning EE 645 3D Computer Vision ES 659 Computer Graphics ES 645 Optimization Methods in ML Theory & Algorithms Basket ES 301 Data Structures & Algorithms II CS 614 Advanced Algorithms CS 617 Computational Complexity Theory CS 617 Complexity Theory CS 328 Introduction to Data Science Systems Basket ES 242 Compilers ES 214 Databases TBD Software Engineering TBD Principles of Programming Languages  § A sample academic path for the revised curriculum for BTech in Computer Science & Engineering is given at Annexure II-A.  BTech Curriculum – Electrical Engineering  § The curriculum for BTech in Electrical Engineering will have discipline specific core courses for 42 credits and discipline specific elective courses for 20 credits.   § The discipline-specific core courses are:  o Signals, Systems & Random Processes (4 credits) o Electronic Devices (3 credits) o Electrical Machines (4 credits) o Power Systems (4 credits) o Control Systems (4 credits) o Digital Systems (4 credits) o Engineering Electromagnetics (4 credits) o Analog & Mixed Signal Circuits (4 credits) o Power Electronics (4 credits) o Digital Signal Processing (4 credits) o Communication Systems (3 credits)  § Students will be free to choose discipline-specific electives from a basket of courses.  § Students are required to do PH 201: Introduction to Electrodynamics as one of their Science Basket courses.   § A sample academic path for the revised curriculum for BTech in Electrical Engineering is given at Annexure II-A.  BTech Curriculum – Integrated Circuit Design & Technology [From AY 2024-25]  § The curriculum for BTech in Integrated Circuit Design & Technology will have discipline specific core courses for 44 credits and discipline specific elective courses for 20 credits.   § The discipline-specific core courses are:    
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 13  o Unveiling the Semiconductor World (2 credits) o Signals, Systems & Random Processes (4 credits) o Computer Organization & Architecture (4 credits) o Digital Systems (4 credits) o Analog & Mixed Signal Circuits (4 credits) o CMOS Circuit Design (4 credits) o Semiconductor Devices (4 credits) o Semiconductor Material & Device Characterization (4 credits) o IC Fabrication & Manufacturing (4 credits) o Thin Film Science & Vacuum Technology (4 credits) o Semiconductor Package Assembly & Manufacturing (4 credits) o IC Fabrication Lab (2 credits) § The tentative list of discipline-specific elective courses is shown in the table below. This list is expected to be dynamic and more courses may be added in the future.  Course Code Course Title TBD VLSI Physical Design: Netlist to GDSII EE 651 CMOS Analog IC Design TBD RF IC Design TBD Power Management IC Design TBD Design for Test TBD Nanoscale Devices TBD Memory Devices, Circuits & Systems TBD Compound Semiconductor Devices & Circuits TBD Power Semiconductor Devices TBD Manufacturing Process Control TBD Display Technology and Manufacturing TBD Physics and Manufacturing of Solar Cells TBD Advanced Semiconductor Manufacturing TBD Fundamentals of MEMS/NEMS  § Students are required to do Physics of Materials or PH 510: Condensed Matter Physics as one of their Science Basket courses.  § A sample academic path for the proposed BTech in Integrated Circuit Design & Technology is given at Annexure II-A.  BTech Curriculum – Materials Engineering  § The curriculum for BTech in Materials Engineering will have discipline specific core courses for 42 credits and discipline specific elective courses for 20 credits.   § The discipline-specific core courses are:  o Structure of Materials (4 credits) o Materials Thermodynamics (4 credits) o Transport Phenomena in Materials Engineering (4 credits) o Microstructural Engineering (4 credits) o Physics of Materials (4 credits) o Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (4 credits) o Mechanical Behaviour of Materials (4 credits) o Polymers, Ceramics and Composites (4 credits) o Materials Processing (4 credits) o Corrosion & Degradation of Materials (4 credits) o Materials & Environment (2 credits).  § Students will be free to choose discipline-specific electives from a basket of courses.   
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 14  § A sample academic path for the revised curriculum for BTech in Materials Engineering is given at Annexure II-A.  BTech Curriculum – Mechanical Engineering  § The curriculum for BTech in Mechanical Engineering will have discipline specific core courses for 44 credits and discipline specific elective courses for 20 credits.   § The proposed discipline-specific core courses are:  o Thermodynamics (3 credits) o Statics & Dynamics (4 credits) o Fluid Dynamics (5 credits) o Mechanics of Solids (4 credits) o Principles of Manufacturing Processes (3 credits) o Vibrations (2 credits) o Heat and Mass Transfer (4 credits) o Manufacturing Systems & Metrology (3 credits) o Mechanics of Materials (3 credits) o Control Systems (4 credits) o Synthesis and Analysis of Mechanisms (3 credits) o Mechanical Systems Design (3 credits) o Energy Systems (3 credits)  § Students will be free to choose discipline-specific electives from a basket of courses.  § A sample academic path for the revised curriculum for BTech in Mechanical Engineering is given at Annexure II-A.   Note: Some of the discipline-specific courses shown in Annexure II-A are subject to revision.     
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 15  Annexure – II-A Bachelor of Technology (Artificial Intelligence)  Semester Course 1 Course 2 Course 3 Course 4 Course 5 Course 6 Course 7 Course 8 PE Course Credits First FP:100 Foundation Programme  HS:191 Introduction to Writing I HS:221 Introduction to Philosophy# MA:103 Calculus of Single Variable &  Linear Algebra ES:101 Engineering Graphics ES:112 Computing  ES:117 The World of Engineering ES:118 Materials for the Future# PE:101 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 3 3 2 3 0 25 Second GE:101 General Education I# HS:192 Introduction to Writing II MA:104 Ordinary Differential Equations BS:192 Undergraduate Science Laboratory ES:113 Data Centric Computing# ES:114 Probability,  Statistics &  Data Visualization ES:115 Design,  Innovation & Prototyping ES:116 Principles & Applications of Electrical Engineering PE:102 Physical Education  2 2 2 3 3 3 5 5 0 25 Third GE:201 General Education II# HS:151 Economics# MA:203 Numerical Methods BS:XXX Science  Basket ES:243 Biology for Engineers ES:242 Data Structures & Algorithms I  ES:244 Signals, Systems & Random Processes  PE:103 Physical Education  2 4 2 4 4 4 4  0 24 Fourth HS:201 World Civilizations & Cultures# MA:XXX Mathematics Basket BS:XXX Science Basket ES:204 Digital  Systems  ES:245 Control  Systems CS:201 Theory of Computing CS:303 Mathematical Foundations for AI  PE:104 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 4 4 4  0 26 Fifth HS:XXX Elective   BS:XXX Elective XX:XXX Open Project Course  ES:336 Computer Organization & Architecture CS:203 Software Tools & Techniques for AI CS:329 Foundations of AI: Multiagent Systems     4 4 4 4 4 4    24 Sixth HS:XXX Elective ES:335 Machine  Learning CS:328 Introduction to Data Science XX:XXX Discipline  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective      4 4 4 4 4     20 Seventh XX:XXX Open Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective       4 4 4 4      16 Eighth XX: XXX Open  Elective  XX:XXX Discipline  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective        4 4 4       12  Discipline Core: 44 Credits, Discipline Electives: 20 Credits Total Credits 172 #May become a basket later   
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 16  Bachelor of Technology (Chemical Engineering)  Semester Course 1 Course 2 Course 3 Course 4 Course 5 Course 6 Course 7 Course 8 PE Course Credits First FP:100 Foundation Programme  HS:191 Introduction to Writing I HS:221 Introduction to Philosophy# MA:103 Calculus of Single Variable &  Linear Algebra ES:101 Engineering Graphics ES:112 Computing  ES:117 The World of Engineering ES:118 Materials for the Future# PE:101 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 3 3 2 3 0 25 Second GE:101 General Education I# HS:192 Introduction to Writing II MA:104 Ordinary Differential Equations BS:192 Undergraduate Science Laboratory ES:113 Data Centric Computing# ES:114 Probability,  Statistics &  Data Visualization ES:115 Design,  Innovation & Prototyping ES:116 Principles & Applications of Electrical Engineering PE:102 Physical Education  2 2 2 3 3 3 5 5 0 25 Third GE:201 General Education II# HS:151 Economics# MA:203 Numerical Methods BS:XXX Science  Basket ES:243 Biology for Engineers ES:211 Thermodynamics CL:201 Chemical  Process Calculations  PE:103 Physical Education  2 4 2 4 4 3 3  0 23 Fourth HS:201 World Civilizations & Cultures# MA:XXX Mathematics Basket BS:XXX Science Basket CL:202 Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics CL:203 Process  Fluid Mechanics   CL:204 Heat  Transfer CL:205 Chemical  Reaction Engineering - I  PE:104 Physical Education  4 2 4 3 3 3 3  0 22 Fifth HS:XXX Elective   XX:XXX Open Project Course  CL:313 Chemical Reaction Engineering - II CL:314 Separation Processes - I  CL:315 Process Dynamics & Control CL:326 Integrated Chemical  Engineering Lab-I XX:XXX Discipline  Elective    4 4 3 3 3 3 4   23 Sixth HS:XXX Elective CL:316 Separation Processes - II CL:317 Process Synthesis, Design & Simulation CL:325 Transport Phenomena CL:327 Integrated Chemical Engineering Lab-II XX:XXX Discipline  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective    4 3 4   3                  2 4 4   24 Seventh XX:XXX Open Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective       4 4 4 4      16 Eighth BS:XXX Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective  XX:XXX Discipline  Elective        4 4 4       12  Discipline Core: 42 Credits, Discipline Elective: 20 Credits Total Credits 170 #May become a basket later   
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 17  Bachelor of Technology (Civil Engineering)  Semester Course 1 Course 2 Course 3 Course 4 Course 5 Course 6 Course 7 Course 8 PE Course Credits First FP:100 Foundation Programme  HS:191 Introduction to Writing I HS:221 Introduction to Philosophy# MA:103 Calculus of Single Variable &  Linear Algebra ES:101 Engineering Graphics ES:112 Computing  ES:117 The World of Engineering ES:118 Materials for the Future# PE:101 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 3 3 2 3 0 25 Second GE:101 General Education I# HS:192 Introduction to Writing II MA:104 Ordinary Differential Equations BS:192 Undergraduate Science Laboratory ES:113 Data Centric Computing# ES:114 Probability,  Statistics &  Data Visualization ES:115 Design,  Innovation & Prototyping ES:116 Principles & Applications of Electrical Engineering PE:102 Physical Education  2 2 2 3 3 3 5 5 0 25 Third GE:201 General Education II# HS:151 Economics# MA:203 Numerical Methods BS:XXX Science  Basket ES:243 Biology for Engineers ES:221 Mechanics of  Solids CE:201 Earth Materials & Processes CE:203 Geospatial Engineering PE:103 Physical Education  2 4 2 4 4 4 2 3 0 25 Fourth HS:201 World Civilizations & Cultures# MA:XXX Mathematics Basket BS:XXX Science Basket ES:212 Fluid  Mechanics  CE:202 Sustainability & Environment CE:302 Structural Analysis CE:XXX Civil Engineering Design/Applications Basket  PE:104 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 3 4 4  0 25 Fifth HS:XXX Elective   XX:XXX Open Project Course  CE:301 Soil  Mechanics CE:310 Hydrology & Hydraulics CE:312 Design of Steel Structures      4 4 5 4 4     21 Sixth HS:XXX Elective CE:311 Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures CE:XXX Civil Engineering Design/Applications Basket CE:XXX Civil Engineering Design/Applications Basket XX:XXX Discipline  Elective      4 5 4 4 4     21 Seventh XX:XXX Open Elective XX:XXX Open  Elective XX:XXX Open  Elective CE:403 Construction Technology & Management       4 4 4 4      16 Eighth BS:XXX Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective  XX:XXX Discipline  Elective        4 4 4       12  Discipline Core: 42 Credits, Civil Engineering Design/Applications Basket: 12 Credits, Discipline Elective: 8 Credits Total Credits 170 #May become a basket later  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 18  Bachelor of Technology (Computer Science and Engineering)  Semester Course 1 Course 2 Course 3 Course 4 Course 5 Course 6 Course 7 Course 8 PE Course Credits First FP:100 Foundation Programme  HS:191 Introduction to Writing I HS:221 Introduction to Philosophy# MA:103 Calculus of Single Variable &  Linear Algebra ES:101 Engineering Graphics ES:112 Computing  ES:117 The World of Engineering ES:118 Materials for the Future# PE:101 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 3 3 2 3 0 25 Second GE:101 General Education I# HS:192 Introduction to Writing II MA:104 Ordinary Differential Equations BS:192 Undergraduate Science Laboratory ES:113 Data Centric Computing# ES:114 Probability,  Statistics &  Data Visualization ES:115 Design,  Innovation & Prototyping ES:116 Principles & Applications of Electrical Engineering PE:102 Physical Education  2 2 2 3 3 3 5 5 0 25 Third GE:201 General Education II# HS:151 Economics# MA:203 Numerical Methods BS:XXX Science  Basket ES:243 Biology for Engineers ES:214 Discrete Mathematics ES:242 Data Structures & Algorithms I   PE:103 Physical Education  2 4 2 4 4 4 4  0 24 Fourth HS:201 World Civilizations & Cultures# MA:XXX Mathematics Basket BS:XXX Science Basket ES:204 Digital  Systems  CS:201 Theory of Computing XX:XXX Systems  Basket XX:XXX Theory & Algorithms Basket  PE:104 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 4 4 4  0 26 Fifth HS:XXX Elective   XX:XXX Open Project Course  ES:336 Computer Organization & Architecture CS:202 Software Tools and Techniques CS:329 Foundations of  AI: Multiagent Systems CS:330 Operating Systems     4 4 4 4 4 4    24 Sixth HS:XXX Elective CS:331 Computer Networks XX:XXX Theory & Algorithms Basket XX:XXX Systems  Basket XX:XXX Discipline  Elective      4 4 4 4 4     20 Seventh XX:XXX Open Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective       4 4 4 4      16 Eighth BS:XXX Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective  XX:XXX Discipline  Elective        4 4 2       10  Discipline Core: 36 Credits, Theory & Algorithms Basket: 8 Credits, Systems Basket: 8 Credits, General CSE Electives Basket: 10 Credits Total Credits 170  #May become a basket later   
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 19  Bachelor of Technology (Electrical Engineering)  Semester Course 1 Course 2 Course 3 Course 4 Course 5 Course 6 Course 7 Course 8 PE Course Credits First FP:100 Foundation Programme  HS:191 Introduction to Writing I HS:221 Introduction to Philosophy# MA:103 Calculus of Single Variable &  Linear Algebra ES:101 Engineering Graphics ES:112 Computing  ES:117 The World of Engineering ES:118 Materials for the Future# PE:101 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 3 3 2 3 0 25 Second GE:101 General Education I# HS:192 Introduction to Writing II MA:104 Ordinary Differential Equations BS:192 Undergraduate Science Laboratory ES:113 Data Centric Computing# ES:114 Probability,  Statistics &  Data Visualization ES:115 Design,  Innovation & Prototyping ES:116 Principles & Applications of Electrical Engineering PE:102 Physical Education  2 2 2 3 3 3 5 5 0 25 Third GE:201 General Education II# HS:151 Economics# MA:203 Numerical Methods PH 201: Introduction to Electrodynamics (Science Basket) ES:243 Biology for Engineers ES:244 Signals,  Systems & Random Processes EE:221 Electronic  Devices EE:223 Electrical  Machines PE:103 Physical Education  2 4 2 4 4 4 3 4 0 27 Fourth HS:201 World Civilizations and Cultures# MA:XXX Mathematics Basket BS:XXX Science Basket ES:204 Digital  Systems EE:224 Power  Systems ES:245 Control  Systems   PE:104 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 4 4   0 22 Fifth HS:XXX Elective   XX:XXX Open Project Course  EE:312 Engineering Electromagnetics  EE:322 Analog & Mixed Signal Circuits EE:323 Digital Signal Processing EE:333 Power  Electronics     4 4 4 4 4 4    24 Sixth HS:XXX Elective EE:313 Communication Systems XX:XXX Discipline  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective     4 3 4 4 4 4    23 Seventh XX:XXX Open Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective       4 4 4 4      16 Eighth BS:XXX Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective          4 4        8  Discipline Core: 42 Credits, Discipline Elective: 20 Credits Total Credits 170  #May become a basket later     
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 20  Bachelor of Technology (Integrated Circuit Design and Technology)  Semester Course 1 Course 2 Course 3 Course 4 Course 5 Course 6 Course 7 Course 8 PE Course Credits First FP:100 Foundation Programme  HS:191 Introduction to Writing I HS:221 Introduction to Philosophy# MA:103 Calculus of Single Variable &  Linear Algebra ES:101 Engineering Graphics ES:112 Computing  ES:117 The World of Engineering ES:118 Materials for the Future# PE:101 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 3 3 2 3 0 25 Second GE:101 General Education I# HS:192 Introduction to Writing II MA:104 Ordinary Differential Equations BS:192 Undergraduate Science Laboratory ES:113 Data Centric Computing# ES:114 Probability,  Statistics &  Data Visualization ES:115 Design,  Innovation & Prototyping ES:116 Principles & Applications of Electrical Engineering PE:102 Physical Education  2 2 2 3 3 3 5 5 0 25 Third GE:201 General Education II# MA:203 Numerical Methods ES:204 Digital  Systems ES:244 Signals, Systems & Random Processes EE:322 Analog &  Mixed-Signal Circuits EE:XXX Unveiling the Semiconductor World EE:XXX Semiconductor Devices  PE:103 Physical Education  2 2 4 4 4 2 4  0 22 Fourth HS:201 World Civilizations and Cultures# MA:XXX Mathematics Basket BS:XXX Science Basket EE:XXX Integrated Circuits Fabrication & Manufacturing EE:XXX Device Fabrication Lab EE:XXX CMOS Circuit Design XX:XXX Discipline  Elective  PE:104 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 4 2 4  0 24 Fifth HS:151 Economics# BS:XXX Science Basket ES:336 Computer Organization & Architecture ES:XXX Semiconductor Material & Device Characterization ES:XXX Introduction to Thin Film Science & Vacuum Technology XX:XXX Discipline  Elective     4 4 4 4 4 4    24 Sixth HS:XXX Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective XX:XXX Open Project Course  ES:XXX Semiconductor Package Assembly & Manufacturing XX:XXX Discipline  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective     4 4 4 4 4 4    24 Seventh HS:XXX Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective ES:243 Biology for Engineers      4 4 4 4 4     20 Eighth BS:XXX Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective          4 4        8  Discipline Core: 44 Credits, Discipline Elective: 20 Credits Total Credits 172  #May become a basket later  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 21  Bachelor of Technology (Materials Engineering)  Semester Course 1 Course 2 Course 3 Course 4 Course 5 Course 6 Course 7 Course 8 PE Course Credits First FP:100 Foundation Programme  HS:191 Introduction to Writing I HS:221 Introduction to Philosophy# MA:103 Calculus of Single Variable &  Linear Algebra ES:101 Engineering Graphics ES:112 Computing  ES:117 The World of Engineering ES:118 Materials for the Future# PE:101 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 3 3 2 3 0 25 Second GE:101 General Education I# HS:192 Introduction to Writing II MA:104 Ordinary Differential Equations BS:192 Undergraduate Science Laboratory ES:113 Data Centric Computing# ES:114 Probability,  Statistics &  Data Visualization ES:115 Design,  Innovation & Prototyping ES:116 Principles & Applications of Electrical Engineering PE:102 Physical Education  2 2 2 3 3 3 5 5 0 25 Third GE:201 General Education II# HS:151 Economics# MA:203 Numerical Methods ES:243 Biology for Engineers MSE:202 Materials Thermodynamics MSE:204 Transport Phenomena in Materials Engineering MSE:207 Structure of Materials  PE:103 Physical Education  2 4 2 4 4 4 4  0 24 Fourth HS:201 World Civilizations and Cultures# MA:XXX Mathematics Basket MSE:203 Integrated Computational Materials Engineering MSE:205 Mechanical Behaviour of Materials MSE:206 Physics of Materials MSE:210 Microstructural Engineering XX:XXX Discipline  Elective  PE:104 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 4 4 4  0 26 Fifth HS:XXX Elective   BS:XXX Science  Basket XX:XXX Open Project Course  MSE:307 Materials Processing MSE:313 Polymers, Ceramics and Composites XX:XXX Discipline  Elective     4 4 4 4 4 4    24 Sixth HS:XXX Elective BS:XXX Science  Basket MSE:302 Corrosion & Degradation of Materials MSE:312 Materials & Environment XX:XXX Discipline  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective     4 4 4 2 4 4    22 Seventh XX:XXX Open Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective       4 4 4 4      16 Eighth BS:XXX Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective          4 4        8  Discipline Core: 42 Credits, Discipline Elective: 20 Credits Total Credits 170  #May become a basket later  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 22  Bachelor of Technology (Mechanical Engineering)  Semester Course 1 Course 2 Course 3 Course 4 Course 5 Course 6 Course 7 Course 8 PE Course Credits First FP:100 Foundation Programme  HS:191 Introduction to Writing I HS:221 Introduction to Philosophy# MA:103 Calculus of Single Variable &  Linear Algebra ES:101 Engineering Graphics ES:112 Computing  ES:117 The World of Engineering ES:118 Materials for the Future# PE:101 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 3 3 2 3 0 25 Second GE:101 General Education I# HS:192 Introduction to Writing II MA:104 Ordinary Differential Equations BS:192 Undergraduate Science Laboratory ES:113 Data Centric Computing# ES:114 Probability,  Statistics &  Data Visualization ES:115 Design,  Innovation & Prototyping ES:116 Principles & Applications of Electrical Engineering PE:102 Physical Education  2 2 2 3 3 3 5 5 0 25 Third GE:201 General Education II# HS:151 Economics# MA:203 Numerical Methods BS:XXX Science  Basket  ES:243 Biology for Engineers ES:211 Thermodynamics ME:206 Statics & Dynamics  PE:103 Physical Education  2 4 2 4 4 3 4  0 23 Fourth HS:201 World Civilizations and Cultures# MA:XXX Mathematics Basket BS:XXX Science  Basket ES:221 Mechanics of Solids ME:207 Fluid  Dynamics ME:208 Vibrations ME:209 Principles of Manufacturing Processes  PE:104 Physical Education  4 2 4 4 5 2 3  0 24 Fifth HS:XXX Elective   XX:XXX Open Project Course  ES:245 Control  Systems ME:333 Mechanics of Materials ME:334 Heat and Mass Transfer XX:XXX Manufacturing Systems and Metrology     4 4 4 3 4 3    22 Sixth HS:XXX Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective ME:335 Synthesis and Analysis of Mechanisms XX:XXX Mechanical Systems  Design XX:XXX Energy  Systems XX:XXX Discipline  Elective     4 4 3 3 3 4    21 Seventh XX: XXX Open  Elective XX:XXX Open Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective       4 4 4 4      16 Eighth BS:XXX Elective XX: XXX Open  Elective  XX:XXX Discipline  Elective XX:XXX Discipline  Elective       4 4 4 4      16  Discipline Core: 44 Credits, Discipline Elective: 20 Credits Total Credits 172 #May become a basket later  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 23  Annexure - III  Distribution of Credit Requirements (Applicable for undergraduate students admitted before AY 2022-23)  Distribution of compulsory and elective courses:  § Institute level compulsory courses: 73 credits § Discipline specific courses: 48-54 credits § Electives: 44 credits § Other requirements: 04 credits  Distribution of courses from various streams:  § Humanities + Management (8 courses): 32 credits § Basic Science (11 courses): 40 credits § Engineering Sciences (8 courses): 29 credits § Discipline Specific (12-16 courses): 48-54 credits § Open Electives and Other Requirements: 20 credits § Total Credits: 169-175 credits Note: 16 credits of Open electives may come from any of the different streams  Institute requirement of credits and electives in various streams:    Compulsory Group Elective Open Electives BS = Basic Science 32 8 16 ES = Engineering Science 28 - HS = Humanities 12 20 D = Discipline Specific 48-54 - Other 5 (FP100+FP101) - Total Credits 125-131 28 16    Note:  § BSE/HSE are BS elective and HS elective, respectively  § FP includes FP 100: Foundation Programme and FP 101: Introduction to Engineering Incase fail to clear FP 100 in the first semester after admission, then any HSS course of 4 credits is to be completed for graduation.  § Incase fail to clear FP 101 in the second semester after admission, then at least two credits of open electives course is to be completed for graduation. § Total of four physical education courses (PE 101, PE 102, PE 103 and PE 104) are required to be completed as part of the graduation requirements for the BTech programme for the students admitted from Academic Year 2021-22 onwards.  For students admitted before 2021-22, the requirement will be two physical education courses (PE 101 and PE 102). § For students admitted in the Academic Year 2020-21, the requirement of CH 202 & PH 102 are replaced by BS 191: Matter and Energy Laboratory (4 credits) and the requirement of HS 101-109 is replaced by HS 191: Introduction to Writing I and HS 192: Introduction to Writing II.  § For students admitted in the Academic Year 2021-22, the requirement of CH 202 & PH 102 are replaced by an additional 4 credits worth of BS elective courses (over and above the already existing requirement of 8 credits worth of BS elective courses).       
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 24  Annexure III Bachelor of Technology: Chemical Engineering First Semester FP 100 Foundation Programme 0 – 0 – 0 – 4 HS 101-109 Language 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 BE 101  Introduction to Life Sciences: Fundamentals of Life 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 MA 101 Mathematics I 4 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 101 Engineering Graphics 2 – 0 – 3 – 3 ES 102/ES 112 Introduction to Computing/ Computing 2 – 0 – 2 – 3 ES 103 Introduction to Electrical Systems 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 PE 101 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  26 Second Semester HS 151 Economics 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 MA 102 Mathematics II 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 PH 101 Physics 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 CH 202 Chemistry Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 104 Introduction to Analog and Digital Electronics 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 105 Electrical and Electronics Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 106 Manufacturing and Workshop practice 2 – 0 – 3 – 4 PE 102 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0 FP 101 Intro to Engineering 0 – 0 – 2 – 1 25 Third Semester HS 221 Introduction to Philosophy 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MA 201 Mathematics III 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 CH 201 General Chemistry 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 PH 102 Physics Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 201 Intro to Design and Innovation 2 – 0 – 4 – 4 ES 211 Thermodynamics 3 –2 – 0 – 4 CL 201 Chemical Process Calculations 1 –2 – 0 – 2 PE 103 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  24 Fourth Semester HS 201-209 World Civilization/ Culture/History 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MA 202 Mathematics IV 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 202 Introduction to Materials 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 ES 221 Mechanics of Solids 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 212 Fluid Mechanics 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 CL 251 Fluid Mechanics Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2  PE 104 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  22 Fifth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 BS Elective 3 –1 – 0 – 4 CL 221 Chemical Engg. Thermodynamics 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 CL 322 Chemical Reaction Engineering 3 –1 – 0 – 4 ES 311 Heat and Mass Transfer 3 –1 – 0 – 4 CL 351 Heat Transfer and Thermodynamics Lab 0 –0 – 4 – 2    22 Sixth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 CL 321 Separation Processes 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 CL 422 Process Control 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 CL 424 Process Analysis and Simulation 1 – 1 – 4 – 3 CL 352 Mass Transfer and Reaction Engg. Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2     17 Seventh Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 –1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 CL 425 Process Synthesis and Design 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 CL 451 Process Dynamics and Control Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2     18 Eighth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 BS Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4      16 Total Credits 170  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 25    Bachelor of Technology: Civil Engineering First Semester FP 100 Foundation Programme 0 – 0 – 0 – 4 HS 101-109 Language 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 BE 101  Introduction to Life Sciences: Fundamentals of Life 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 MA 101 Mathematics I 4 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 101 Engineering Graphics 2 – 0 – 3 – 3 ES 102/ES 112 Introduction to Computing/ Computing 2 – 0 – 2 – 3 ES 103 Introduction to Electrical Systems 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 PE 101 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  26 Second Semester HS 151 Economics 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 MA 102 Mathematics II 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 PH 101 Physics 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 CH 202 Chemistry Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 104 Introduction to Analog and Digital Electronics 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 105 Electrical and Electronics Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 106 Manufacturing and Workshop practice 2 – 0 – 3 – 4 PE 102 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0 FP 101 Intro to Engineering 0 – 0 – 2 – 1 25 Third Semester HS 221 Introduction to Philosophy 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MA 201 Mathematics III 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 CH 201 General Chemistry 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 PH 102 Physics Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 201 Intro to Design and Innovation 2 – 0 – 4 – 4 CE 201 Earth Materials & Processes 2 – 0 – 3 – 4  PE 103 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  22 Fourth Semester HS 201-209 World Civilization/ Culture/History 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MA 202 Mathematics IV 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 202 Introduction to Materials 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 ES 212 Fluid Mechanics 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 221 Mechanics of Solids 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 CE 202 Sustainability & Environment 1 - 0 - 3 - 3  PE 104 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  23 Fifth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 CE 301 Soil Mechanics 3 - 1 - 2 - 5 CE 302 Structural Analysis 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 CE 303 Geospatial Engineering 1 - 0 - 3 - 3 CE 308 Water Resource Engineering 2 - 0 - 3 - 4     20 Sixth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 CE 304 Concrete Design 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 CE 305 Steel Design (half semester) 2 - 1 - 0 - 2 CE 307 Masonry Design (half semester) 2 - 1 - 0 - 2 CE 306 Civil Engineering Materials Lab 0 - 0 - 4 - 2 CE 403 Construction Technology & Management 3 - 0 - 0 - 4 CE 309 Field Survey Project 0 - 0 - 0 - 2   20 Seventh Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 BS Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 CE 401 Comprehensive Project – 1 0 - 0 - 3 - 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4     20 Eighth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 BS Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4      16 Total Credits 172       
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 26  Bachelor of Technology: Computer Science & Engineering First Semester FP 100 Foundation Programme 0 – 0 – 0 – 4 HS 101-109 Language 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MA 101 Mathematics I 4 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 101 Engineering Graphics 2 – 0 – 3 – 3 ES 102/ES 112 Introduction to Computing/ Computing 2 – 0 – 2 – 3 ES 103 Introduction to Electrical Systems 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 BE 101  Introduction to Life Sciences:  Fundamentals of Life 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 PE 101 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  26 Second Semester HS 151 Economics 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 MA 102 Mathematics II 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 104 Introduction to Analog and Digital Electronics 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 105 Electrical and Electronics Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 106 Manufacturing and Workshop Practice 2 – 0 – 3 – 4 PH 101 Physics 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 CH 202 Chemistry Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 PE 102 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0 FP 101 Intro to Engineering 0 – 0 – 2 – 1 25 Third Semester HS 221 Introduction to Philosophy 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MA 201 Mathematics III 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 201 Intro to Design and Innovation 2 – 0 – 4 – 4 ES 203 Digital Systems 2 - 1 - 3 - 4 ES  242 Data Structures & Algorithms I 2 - 0 - 2 - 3 CH 201 General Chemistry 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 PH 102 Physics Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 PE 103 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  25 Fourth Semester HS 201-209 World Civilization/ Culture/History 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MA 202 Mathematics IV 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 301 Data Structures & Algorithms II 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 ES 214 Discrete Mathematics 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 ES 215 Computer Organization and Architecture 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 ES 202 Introduction to Materials 3 - 0 - 0 - 4  PE 104 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  24 Fifth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 CS 302 Theory of Computation 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 CS 301 Operating Systems  3 - 0 - 2 - 5 CS  XXX Extended Core 3 - 0 - 0 - 4 BS Elective 3 - 1 - 0 - 4     21 Sixth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 CS 328 Introduction to Data Science 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 CS 327 Compilers 3 - 0 - 2 - 5 CS  XXX Extended Core 3 - 0 - 0 - 4 CS  XXX Extended Core 3 - 0 - 0 - 4     21 Seventh Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 BS Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4      16 Eighth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4       12 Total Credits 170  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 27                                   Bachelor of Technology: Electrical Engineering First Semester FP 100 Foundation Programme 0 – 0 – 0 – 4 HS 101-109 Language 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 BE 101  Introduction to Life Sciences: Fundamentals of Life 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 MA 101 Mathematics I 4 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 101 Engineering Graphics 2 – 0 – 3 – 3 ES 102/ES 112 Introduction to Computing/ Computing 2 – 0 – 2 – 3 ES 103 Introduction to Electrical Systems 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 PE 101 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  26 Second Semester HS 151 Economics 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 MA 102 Mathematics II 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 PH 101 Physics 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 CH 202 Chemistry Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 104 Introduction to Analog and Digital Electronics 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 105 Electrical and Electronics Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 106 Manufacturing and Workshop Practice 2 – 0 – 3 – 4 PE 102 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0 FP 101 Intro to Engineering 0 – 0 – 2 – 1 25 Third Semester HS 221 Introduction to Philosophy 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MA 201 Mathematics III 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 CH 201 General Chemistry 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 PH 102 Physics Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 201 Intro to Design and Innovation 2 – 0 – 4 – 4 ES 203 Digital Systems 2 - 1 - 3 - 4 EE 221 Electronic Devices  2 - 1 - 0 - 3 PE 103 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  25 Fourth Semester HS 201-209 World Civilization/ Culture/History 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MA 202 Mathematics IV 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES  202 Introduction to Materials 3 - 0 - 0 - 4 EE 331 Electrical Machines  3 - 1 - 0 - 4 ES 216 Signals, Systems and Networks 3 - 1 - 0 - 4   PE 104 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  20 Fifth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 EE 332 Power Systems 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 ES 331 Probability & Random Processes 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 EE 321 Analog Circuits 3 - 1 - 3 - 5 EE 311 Electromagnetic Waves 3 - 1 - 0 - 4     21 Sixth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 EE 341 Communication Systems 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 ES 333 Microprocessors & Embedded Systems 2 - 1 - 2 - 4 ES 332 Control Theory 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 EE 333 Power Electronics 2 - 1 - 3 - 4     20 Seventh Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 BS Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 EE 411 Digital Signal Processing 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 EE 431 Electrical Systems Lab 0 - 0 - 4 - 2    22 Eighth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 BS Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4      16 Total Credits 175  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 28  Bachelor of Technology: Materials Engineering First Semester FP 100 Foundation Programme 0 – 0 – 0 – 4 HS 101-109 Language 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 BE 101  Introduction to Life Sciences: Fundamentals of Life 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 MA 101 Mathematics I 4 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 101 Engineering Graphics 2 – 0 – 3 – 3 ES 102/ES 112 Introduction to Computing/ Computing 2 – 0 – 2 – 3 ES 103 Introduction to Electrical Systems 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 PE 101 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  26 Second Semester HS 151 Economics 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 MA 102 Mathematics II 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 PH 101 Physics 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 CH 202 Chemistry Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 104 Introduction to Analog and Digital Electronics 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 105 Electrical and Electronics Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 106 Manufacturing and Workshop practice 2 – 0 – 3 – 4 PE 102 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0 FP 101 Intro to Engineering 0 – 0 – 2 – 1 25 Third Semester HS 221 Introduction to Philosophy 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MA 201 Mathematics III 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 CH 201 General Chemistry 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 PH 102 Physics Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 201 Intro to Design and Innovation 2 – 0 – 4 – 4 ES 211 Thermodynamics 3 - 2 - 0 - 4 ES 202 Introduction to Materials 3 - 0 - 0 - 4 PE 103 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  26 Fourth Semester HS 201-209 World Civilization/ Culture/History 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MA 202 Mathematics IV 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 212 Fluid Mechanics 3 - 2 - 0 - 4 ES 221 Mechanics of Solids 3 - 2 - 0 - 4 MSE 209 Material Thermodynamics and Kinetics 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 MSE 201 Microstructural Engineering 3 - 0 - 2 - 5  PE 104 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  25 Fifth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MSE 303 Mechanical Behaviour of materials 3 - 0 - 2 - 5 MSE 304 Principle of Metal Extraction & refining 3 - 0 - 0 - 4 MSE 305 Advanced Materials 3 - 0 - 0 - 4 MSE 310 Physics of Materials  3 - 0 - 0 - 4     21 Sixth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 BS Elective 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 MSE 307 Materials Processing 3 - 0 - 0 - 4 MSE 352 Material characterization techniques 2 - 0 - 3 - 4 MSE 302 Corrosion & Degradation of Materials 3 - 0 - 0 - 4     20 Seventh Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MSE 402 Computational Process Design 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4      16 Eighth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 BS Elective 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4      16 Total Credits 175  
 Academic Affairs Advisory No. 13 (Mar 2024) Page No. 29  Bachelor of Technology: Mechanical Engineering First Semester FP 100 Foundation Programme 0 – 0 – 0 – 4 HS 101-109 Language 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MA 101 Mathematics I 4 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 101 Engineering Graphics 2 – 0 – 3 – 3 ES 102/ES 112 Introduction to Computing/ Computing 2 – 0 – 2 – 3 ES 103 Introduction to Electrical Systems 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 BE 101  Introduction to Life Sciences: Fundamentals of Life 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 PE 101 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  26 Second Semester HS 151 Economics 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 MA 102 Mathematics II 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 104 Introduction to  Analog and Digital Electronics 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 105 Electrical and Electronics Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 106 Manufacturing and Workshop Practice 2 – 0 – 3 – 4 PH 101 Physics 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 CH 202 Chemistry Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 PE 102 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0 FP 101 Intro to Engineering 0 – 0 – 2 – 1 25 Third Semester HS 221 Introduction to Philosophy 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MA 201 Mathematics III 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 201 Introduction to  Design & Innovation 2 – 0 – 4 – 4 ES 211 Thermodynamics 3 - 2 - 0 - 4 CH 201 General Chemistry 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 PH 102 Physics Lab 0 – 0 – 4 – 2 ES 321 Dynamics and Vibration 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 PE 103 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  26 Fourth Semester HS 201-209 World Civilization/ Culture/History 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 MA 202 Mathematics IV 3 – 2 – 0 – 4 ES 202 Introduction to Materials 3 - 0 - 0 - 4 ES 212 Fluid Mechanics 3 - 2 - 0 - 4 ES 221 Mechanics of Solids 3 - 2 - 0 - 4   PE 104 Physical Education 0 – 0 – 0 – 0  20 Fifth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 ES 311 Heat and Mass Transfer 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 ME 321 Mechanics of Deformable Bodies 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 ME 331 Manufacturing Processes & Systems 3 - 0 - 0 - 4 ME 351 Mechanical Engineering Lab - I 0 - 0 - 4 - 2     18 Sixth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4  ES 332 Control Theory 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 ME 322 Synthesis and Analysis of Mechanisms 2 - 1 - 2 - 4 ME 332 Industrial Engineering & Operations Research 3 - 1 - 0 - 4 ME 352 Mechanical Engineering  Lab - II 0 - 0 - 4 - 2 ME 361 Integrated Design and Manufacturing-I 0 - 1 - 4 - 2    20 Seventh Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 ME 461 Integrated Design & Manufacturing - II 0 - 1 - 4 - 2 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4  BS Elective 3 - 1 - 0 - 4     18 Eighth Semester HS Elective 3 – 0 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 Open Elective 3 – 1 – 0 – 4 BS Elective 3 - 1 - 0 - 4      16 Total Credits 169  General Administration  Advisory 22 (Version 1.0, February  2020)                     Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
AWARDS FOR ACHIEVEMENTS IN SPORTS   
(As approved by the BoG in its 28th meeting held on 02 January 2020) 
 
Sport is an essential component of the extracurricular activities of any educational 
institute. It is also an important factor of human development, good health, and 
companionship and to have a spirit of healthy and friendly competition within the 
communit y. The Institute has been placing significant emphasis on sports activities 
by students, staff and faculty.  
 
The Inter IIT Sport Meet is an annual sports tournament organized to encourage 
physical education, sporting culture and sporting spirit among the students, faculty 
and staff of various IITs. Two separate events, one for the students and the other for 
faculty and staff, are organized each year, normally in December. In addition, an 
Inter IIT Aquatic meet is organized typically in the month of October . These meets 
attract sportspersons of the highest caliber from the IIT system, and its location 
rotates from one IIT to another every year.  
 
As a second generation IIT, we have significantly smaller number of faculty, students 
and staff as compared to th e first generation of IITs. And yet, we will like our 
contingent to the Inter IIT Sport/Aquatic Meet to win medals and awards. This can be 
a huge morale booster for our internal stakeholders and help build image for the 
Institute within the IIT system.  
 
Hence, the Board of Governors of the Institute in its 28th meeting held on 20 January 
2020 approved to create awards for achievements in the Inter IIT Sport/Aquatic Meet 
as per the following norms :  
 
1. The Award will be known as “Achievement in Sports Awards”.  
2. Any faculty/ staff/ student who wins first, second and third prize/ medal in the 
Inter IIT Sport/Aquatic Meet will be eligible for this award.  
3. An amount of Rs. 50,000/ - per prize/ medal with a merit certificate will be 
awarded to a prizewinner in any individual sports. However, there will be an 
upper ceiling of Rs 1.00 lakh per person per year, that is, if the same person 
receives three medals, t he cash prize will be limited to Rs 1.00 lakh only.  
4. In the group sports, the award money will be Rs 1.00 lakh, which will be shared 
by the members of the winning team. Merit certificate will also be given to each 
member of the team.  
5. The Awardees may also park the award money with the Institute and use it in 
future for:  
a. Professional development activities, including purchase of sporting 
equipment/ facilities/ training to improve their skills.  
b. Financial support (registration, travel, etc.) for participatio n of future 
tournaments/ sports/ professional meets.  
c. For team gatherings and/or celebration of their achievements.  
6. The expenditure will be charged to the Excellence Funds in the endowment.  
 
This comes into force with effect from the 2019 Inter IIT Sports and Aquatic meets.    Academic Affairs Advisory (Version 1.0, February  2020)                                   Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
EARLY ADMIT M.Sc PROGRAM   
(As approved by the BoG in its 28th meeting held on 02 January 2020) 
 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 28th meeting held on 20 January 2020 approved  
the introduction of Early Admit M.Sc Program from Academic Year 2020 -21. 
 
Background:  The Institute will  initiate Early Admit M.Sc program to enhance the quality of M.Sc. 
admissions in the disciplines of Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics at the Institute. Currently, 
students are recruited into these programs solely based on their score and rank in the JAM 
(Joint Admission Test for M. Sc.) exam. It is envisioned that such an “Early Admit M.Sc.” 
program, modeled along the lines of the Early Admit M.Tech. program, where students from 
select colleges around the country are recruited, will be instrumental in targeting top -ranked 
students an d attracting them to IITGN.  
 
Objective:  To attract high -quality students into the Institute’s M.Sc. (Physics, Chemistry and 
Mathematics) programs.  
 
Eligibility:  
 Students currently enrolled in the final year of the undergraduate program at select 
institutions in India can apply.  
 B.Tech students in any discipline from the colleges included in the Start Early Ph.D. 
program list can apply.  
 The first five rank -holders in the class (at the end of the pre -final year) will be eligible. The 
Department Head  / Principal / Director of the respective institute will need to issue a rank 
certificate.  
 A valid JAM/GATE score will not be mandatory.  
 
Tuition Fees, Curriculum, Other Norms:  These will be similar to that of the regular M.Sc. 
program at IITGN.  
 
Selection  Process:  Students will be selected from approximately 40 select academic 
institutions in the country based on their academic performance (current rank in the class as 
certified by authorities in the parent institute), a written test and/or interview.  
 
Other details:  
 Since this is an experimental initiative the students admitted through the Early Admit 
M.Sc program will be supernumerary and will not count in the sanctioned strength for the 
admission to these programs through JAM.  
 A scholarship of Rs. 5000 per month be given to students admitted through the Early 
Admit M.Sc. program. This scholarship will continue only if the student maintains a CPI of 
8.0 or above.  
 This program  will be closely monitored in terms of its impact in attracting quality students  
and modified year to year till it stabilizes.  
    
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
IIT GN PhD FELLOWSHIP PROGRAMME FOR B.TECHS OF THE IITs  AND 
OTHER TOP UG PROGRAMMES IN INDIA (START EARLY PH.D)  
 
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 5th meeting held on 14TH December 2011 
and later mod ified by Senate in its 15th Meeting held on 03rd January 2014)  
 
Background:  
 
 
1. The Kakodkar Committee, looking into functioning of the IITs, has strongly 
recommended that a) IITs must significantly increase the number of PhD students, 
and b) IITs must make extra efforts to bring the BTechs of the IIT system into the 
PhD programme.  
 
2. The objective of this programme  is to attract those holding B.Tech degree from the 
IIT system as well as those from other top undergraduate colleges  in the country to 
our PhD prog ram. 
 
3. Under this programme direct admission into our PhD programme may be offered to 
 
a. BTech graduates of the IIT system regardless of whether they have 
qualified GATE or other national level examination but have a CPI of not 
less than 6.0 at the end of the ir third year.  
 
b. Top three rankers in different branches of BTech programme in selected 7 0 
engineering colleges in the country PLUS all the NITs. The admission will 
be based on the academic performance at the end of third year.  
 
4. The admission offer will be made when the students are in their final year of 
BTech, perhaps before they go through their placement season.  
 
5. The selected candidates will have to fulfill the eligibility criteria at the end of 
the BTech in terms of percentage of marks etc. and will joi n the Institute as a 
PhD student upon completion of their BTech degree requirements.  
 
6. There will be no requirement of passing GATE examination for admission for 
these candidates. However, there will be a differential for the financial support for 
such cand idates as outlined below.  
 
7. All candidates admitted under this programme will be offered the regular PhD 
fellowship and will be required to contribute the usual 8 hours / week of time 
towards academic assistance.  
 
 
 
Academic Affairs Advisory 20 (Version 3. 0, August 2019 ) Page 1  
 
  
 
8. Those students, admitted through this programme, who have qualified GATE or 
qualify GATE during their studies at IITGN, will receive in addition to the full 
fellowship, an additional fellowship of Rs 10,000 per month from the do nations, 
subject to (a) they contributing an additional 4 hours per week in teaching activities of 
the Institute, (b) availability of donation funds, and (c) satisfactory academic 
performance of the student. This additional fellowship will be renewed every  year 
based on academic performance and contribution to the teaching programme. 
Further, the additional Fellowship will be provided for not more than 36 months.  
 
9. Department of Science and Technology (DST) has recently started a program called 
INSPIRE (Inno vation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research). In this program DST  
gives fellowship (for 5 years) to 1st rank holders of graduate/post graduate programs 
to do PhD at IITs. If any such student joins IITGN, the Institute will provide an 
additional fellows hip of Rs 10,000/ - per month additional fellowship from the 
donations subject to (a) the student contributing an additional 4 hours per week in 
teaching activities of the Institute, (b) availability of donation funds, and (c) 
satisfactory performance of th e student.  
 
10. Every year, the Institute will send a communication to all the concerned institutes 
with requests to advertise the publicity materials, and to encourage their students to 
apply to IITGN.  
 
11. The students short -listed by the concerned faculty membe rs at IITGN will be invited 
by the Institute for a visit and an interview before they are offered the admission. 
They will be paid their travel expenses by the Institute for this visit.  
 
12. The students offered admission through this programme will be asked t o send an 
acceptance letter and deposit the fees . 
 
13. For this scheme to work well, it is important that IITGN must engage the colleges ( in 
addition to  the IITs  and NITs ) in a number of collaborative activities and not just look 
at them as source for students . Hence, IITGN will engage maximum possible 
colleges covered under this programme through:  
 
a. Summer internship opportunities to their undergraduate students  
b. Summer Research Opportunity to their faculty members.  
c. Joint academic and research activities with th eir faculty members.  
d. Enabling the students of such colleges to come for laboratory usage  
e. Visit of IITGN faculty for lectures and mentoring of students in these colleges.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Academic A ffairs Advisory 20 (Version 3.0, August 2019 ) Page 2  
 
 
 Research & Development Advisory 02 (Version 2.1, October 2023)  
) Page 1  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR 
CONSULTING AND TESTING PROJECTS 
 
A. INTRODUCTION 
 
IIT Gandhinagar considers carrying out consultancy projects an important activity to achieve 
one of its objectives in contributing to the country’s industrial growth. Hence, as a matter of 
policy, the Institute encourages its faculty members to undertake consultancy work. These also 
benefit the concerned faculty members and the Institute in several ways, in addition to providing 
much needed service to the industry. They enrich the professional experience and knowledge of 
the faculty members and thus, make them better educators. The projects provide a firsthand 
knowledge of the current problems of industry, which is very helpful in tuning the curriculum to 
industry’s needs. The faculty members get an opportunity to apply their ideas on practical 
systems. The students working on these projects are exposed to practical experience useful in 
finding better jobs towards the end of their studies. Finally, the consultancy projects provide 
some financial incentive to faculty, staff and students. 
 
Faculty members also undertake testing projects, which are required by industries/utilities for 
the performance evaluation of specific products. The testing projects involve utilization of 
Institute laboratory facilities. Institute, however, discourages undertaking any certification work, 
unless the concerned facilities are recognized by appropriate authority for this purpose. 
 
This document provides general guidelines for consulting and testing projects at                          
IIT Gandhinagar. 
 
 
B. CONSULTANCY PROJECTS 
 
B.1 Project Initiation & Management 
 
1. Each consultancy project will have a Principal Investigator/Investigator, who will be 
responsible  for the following: 
a. Formulating the project proposal which may include  
(i) Planning of the work to be done, 
(ii) Estimating costs, according to the guidelines provided in a later section, and  
(iii)     Identifying other collaboration partners/Investigators and consultants, if necessary. 
b. Execution of work. 
c. Handling all communications with the clients after the project has been accepted. 
d. Submission of intermediate and final reports as agreed in the project proposal. 
e. Making recommendations to the Dean, R&D regarding expenditure from the project funds 
and honoraria to be paid to faculty, staff and students. 
 
2. Appointment of Principal Investigator: Industrial organizations usually approach the Institute 
for consultancy work through a faculty member or a functionary of the Institute (i.e. Head, Dean 
or Director). When a faculty member is approached for the work, he/she will be the Principal 
Investigator. If he/she does not wish to be the Principal Investigator or if the project is referred to 
a functionary, the Principal Investigator would be identified through appropriate discussions. 
 
3. The project proposal prepared by the Principal Investigator will be forwarded to the client 
through Head of the Department and the Dean of Research and Development. Research & Development Advisory 02 (Version 2.1, October 2023)  
) Page 2  4. The Institute requires the total cost of the project to be paid by the client, in advance, before 
the work commences. In case the project is to continue for more than a year, the Institute may 
permit, at its discretion, commencement of work with only yearly cost deposited in advance. All 
payments from clients will be received by the Institute. The expenditure and disbursements will 
be made following the Institute procedures. 
 
5. After the cost of the project has been received, the R&D Office will assign a project/job 
number and inform the same to the client, Principal Investigator and the Head of the concerned 
department. This completes the process of initiation of a consultancy project. The above 
project/job number must be quoted in all subsequent correspondence. 
 
6. Project file will be closed with the submission of final project report and disbursement of 
all committed expenditure including honoraria, institute overheads & Goods and Services Tax 
(GST). 
 
B.2 Budgetary Norms 
 
From the total budget of the consultancy project, the institute overhead (current rate is 20% of 
the total amount) and GST will be deducted as per the applicable rates. The amount of GST 
deducted, would be deposited to the Government account. The project investigator will provide 
the break-up of the project amount in a prescribed proforma at the time of submitting the 
proposal and also while opening the account. 
 
Cost of a consultancy project will consist of two parts viz., Actual Expenses, and Consultancy 
Fee/honoraria. The Actual Expenses should cover the following costs related to the project: 
1. Permanent equipment to be procured. 
2. Consumables to be used. 
3. Computational charges (at commercial rates). 
4. Charges to be paid for the use of specific equipment in the Institute or in central facilities. 
5. Contingency expenses to cover cost of supplies, preparation of report, typing, drafting, 
stationery, reproduction, literature (books, journals, membership fee of professional societies), 
postage and telephone (including rental and STD/trunk call bill of telephone at residence) and 
other miscellaneous expenses. 
6. TA/DA to cover site visits, meetings outside the Institute and participation in conferences 
within India or abroad. The most expeditious and convenient mode of travel should be used to 
minimize period of absence from the Institute. There will be no restriction, from the Institute, on 
travel by air or taxi on grounds of entitlement. DA will be paid as per Institute rules. Actual 
lodging expenses, in addition to full DA, will be paid on production of receipt, as per the 
institute, R&D office norms. For each site visit, a fee will be charged at a rate specified in the 
project proposal. The site visit will be treated as a consultancy assignment, and any income from 
such assignments will be distributed as per the existing norms for the consultancy projects. 
Faculty members going out of town on consultancy work will be treated to be on duty subject to 
a maximum of 30 days in a year. 
Principal Investigator and other Investigators will be permitted to use project funds (of one or 
several projects) for participation in conference/workshops/seminars within India and one 
conference/workshop/seminar outside India in a year. Normal Institute rules will be applicable 
for payment of TA/DA for such participations. 
7. Salaries of project employees. Research & Development Advisory 02 (Version 2.1, October 2023)  
) Page 3  8. Administrative expenses for providing infrastructure for execution of project and to cover 
indirect expenses. The Institute will charge overhead towards administrative   expenses at the rate 
of 20% of the total project cost (excluding the GST). 
9. Any other cost. 
 
Estimates for the above expenses should be carefully prepared by the Principal Investigator 
keeping in mind other market rates for equipment, material and services, R&D norms for 
salaries, commercial rates for computer usage, etc. 
 
There is no rigid norm for consultation fee/honorarium to be paid to faculty members. This 
depends upon several factors such as importance of advice, expertise available in the country, 
experience of the faculty, etc. Although the consultation fee is not related to the time spent 
by the faculty member on the project, many experienced persons charge about four times their 
daily salary for the equivalent of full day of work. 
 
C. NORMS FOR TESTING JOBS 
 
The Institute will undertake testing jobs at standard fee or at the charges estimated by the 
faculty member who will supervise the testing work, alongwith the applicable rate of GST. The 
testing fee charged from the client will be divided into three equal parts for Institute funds, 
R&D Fund, and distribution to faculty and staff. It is, however, expected that the permissible 
amount may be distributed to faculty and staff in case of non- routine testing jobs and only to 
staff members for routine testing jobs. 
 
D. GOODS AND SERVICES TAX (GST) 
 
Goods and Services Tax (GST) will be charged as per the applicable rates on the total 
budget of the consultancy/testing projects.  
 
E. LIMITATIONS 
 
1. The time spent by faculty/staff members on consultation work should be limited, on an 
average, to one day a week. 
 
2. Absence of faculty/staff member on consultancy work from campus should be limited to              
30 days in a year, which should normally not exceed 7 working days in a semester. 
 
3. It is expected that only those consultancy projects will be accepted by the Institute, 
which provide challenge befitting professional competence of the faculty members. Sufficient 
caution also needs to be exercised to ensure that consultancy projects do not interfere with the 
normal duties of the faculty members. Academic Affairs Advisory 39 (Version 2.1, March 2024) Page 1  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR NORMS FOR BTECH-MTECH DUAL DEGREE PROGRAMME  [As approved by a) the BoG in its 18th meeting held on 16 May 2016, 34th meeting held on 28 April 2022, 39th meeting held on 19 January 2024 b) Senate in its 60th meeting held on 26th September 2022]  1.  Introduction:  Students may be admitted to the BTech – MTech dual degree programme at IIT Gandhinagar in the following manners:  ● The Institute may directly admit students to the BTech-MTech dual degree programme (hereafter referred to as the direct admission mode) based on the results of JEE (Advanced) on recommendation of JoSAA.  ● Students enrolled in the BTech programme at IIT Gandhinagar can opt to join BTech-MTech dual degree programme (hereafter referred to as the sliding mode), provided they fulfill the eligibility criteria and are recommended by their respective disciplines.    2. Eligibility and Selection Process (Sliding Mode):  ● BTech students at IIT Gandhinagar who have joined in 2013 or later may apply for a dual degree programme any time after completion of four semesters, but latest by the end of six semesters. Students in 2013 batch may be permitted to opt for conversion to dual degree by July 2016 as a one-time exception.  ● The students should have secured a minimum CPI of 6.0 out of 10 at the time of application.  ● The students are free to apply to disciplines (in which a regular MTech programme exists) other than the discipline in which they are enrolled for their BTech programme, provided they are eligible.  ● The disciplines will announce the discipline wise eligibility criteria in advance.  ● Recommendations for conversion to dual degree programme will be made by a selection committee setup at the discipline in which the student wishes to pursue their MTech.  3. Change of Programme and/or Branch (Direct Admission Mode):  ● Students admitted to the BTech-MTech dual degree programmes through direct admission mode are eligible for a change of programme/branch. This one-time change will be at the beginning of the second year and will be governed by the same branch change policies followed for BTech programmes. For this purpose, the direct admission BTech-MTech dual degree programmes will be considered equivalent to a branch of a regular BTech programme. For example, a BTech-MTech Dual Degree in Computer Science and Engineering student could change the programme to BTech in Chemical Engineering, BTech in Computer Science & Engineering, or BTech-MTech Dual Degree in Electrical Engineering. Similarly, a student admitted to BTech in Chemical Engineering could change the programme to direct admission BTech-MTech Dual Degree programmes in addition to options for change of branch among the regular BTech disciplines.  Academic Affairs Advisory 39 (Version 2.1, March 2024) Page 2   ● At the beginning of the second year, after a round of re-allotment of students following the branch change policy mentioned above, students in a direct admission BTech-MTech dual degree programme can request a change of programme within the discipline before the beginning of the second year. This change can be permitted based on merit (similar to a regular branch change), with the constraint that the number of students on roll in the direct admission BTech-MTech dual degree programme does not fall below 50% of its sanctioned strength. The merit at the end of the first year of the BTech programme will be considered for this programme change (without fail grades/backlogs). Change of programme from BTech-MTech dual degree to regular BTech programme can be effected only once at the beginning of the second year.   [Note: (a) Fail grade/backlogs also include first year BTech/BTech-MTech courses which were dropped before the end of the 1st/2nd semester, courses which were prescribed for first year BTech/BTech-MTech students but were not registered for, fail grades in courses with zero credit like Physical Education course(s), fail grades in courses with only Pass/Fail grade like General Education etc. (b) The CPI used for branch/programme change is only based on courses which are prescribed for first year BTech/BTech-MTech students of a particular batch. Additional courses, if any completed, will not be counted towards the CPI used for branch/programme change.]  4. Graduation Requirements and Norms:  ● Students enrolled in the dual degree programme have to earn a minimum of 72 credits, in addition to the credits counted towards their BTech degree requirements. This is against the 80 credits required for regular MTech programme after BTech or equivalent degree.  ● Students should obtain a minimum of 24 credits through courses and a minimum of 32 credits through MTech thesis units. Note that the regular MTech requires minimum 32 credits through courses and 32 credits of thesis units.  ● The open elective requirement in the BTech programme of the student may be reduced by 4 credits.  ● The student in sliding mode may have to do additional courses if they opt for an MTech degree in a discipline other than their BTech discipline, which will be specified by the second discipline during the change of programme.  ● The students have to also successfully defend their MTech thesis to complete the requirements of the dual degree.  ● Single CPI will be maintained till the completion of all the requirements of both the degrees and two separate CPIs will be mentioned in the final transcript, based on the graduation claim made by the student. One CPI will be for all the courses claimed towards the BTech degree and another based on all credits earned towards the MTech degree.  ● The students may also opt for Honours in the same discipline and/or Minor(s) in other discipline(s) as part of their BTech degree by clearing the additional requisite credits.  ● Pass/fail conversion will be allowed only for two courses during the entire period of the dual degree.  Academic Affairs Advisory 39 (Version 2.1, March 2024) Page 3  ● All other norms such as substitution of courses will be applicable separately for the courses counted towards BTech and MTech degrees.  ● If the student does not maintain a CPI of above 6.0 or have secured more than two U grades in MTech thesis units, the student will be converted to the BTech programme.  ● The maximum duration of the dual degree programme will be seven years.  5. Fellowship:  ● Fellowship, as per prevailing rates for MTech students, may be paid to students opting for the dual degree program for a maximum period of 12 months.  ● The fellowship will begin after the eighth semester, subject to the student completing all the requirements of the BTech degree.  ● Students having a CPI of 8.0 or above (7.5 for students from SC/ST/PD category) at the end of the 8th semester are eligible for the fellowship without having to appear for GATE. All other students will need a valid GATE score (above the prescribed cut-off) to avail fellowship.  6. Tuition Fees: The students will deposit the tuition fees as per norms of the BTech programme until completion of the eighth semester or completion of requirements of their BTech degree, whichever is later. They will pay fees as per norms of the MTech programme (for candidates paid a fellowship) afterwards, till completion of all requirements for the award of both the Degrees.   7. Award of Degrees: The student will be awarded both BTech and MTech degrees after successfully completing all the requirements for the award of both the degrees.  8. Exit Options:   a) Sliding Mode: The student may request to opt out of the dual degree programme at any point during the programme after giving valid reasons, and if the request is approved, the student will be treated as in the BTech programme.   b) Direct Admission Mode: The BSc in Engineering degree will be an exit option for students who are admitted to the BTech-MTech dual degree programme through the direct admission route. Exit with a BTech is not an option for students in this programme, who remain in the BTech-MTech dual degree after the beginning of the second year.  General Administration  Advisory 26 (Version 1.0, December 2021)                     Page 1 of 1 
 
 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAG AR 
 
NORMS FOR ESTABLISHM ENT OF LONG SERVICE AWARD  
AT THE INSTITUTE  
(As approved by the BOG in its 28th meeting held on 02 January 2020 and  
33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021)  
 
 
The Board of Governors in its’ 28th meeting held on 02 January 2020 decided to 
establish an award named “Long Service Award” for the employees who serve the 
Institute continuously for a period of ten years. The award will consist of a cash prize 
of Rs.50,000/ -, a memento and a certificate . The Board in its 33rd meeting held on 15 
November 2021 approved the following norms for the award:  
 
1. All the fulltime employees drawing salary from the Institute will be eligible for this 
award on completion of ten years of continuous service. The term will be calculated 
for the continuous engagement period as a regular and/or as a contractual 
employee. The ‘employee’ here will mean following members of the Institute . 
 
a. Faculty (regular, contract)  
b. Regular staff  
c. Contractual and/or Project based contractual staff  
 
2. In case of any ambiguity, a liberal interpretation may be undertaken but the same 
must be put on record. The effort is to be more inclusive, rather than to be 
conservative , in identifying the eligible st aff/ faculty.  
 
3. The awardees will be felicitated on the occasion of Independence Day (15 
August) or Republic Day (26 January) or some other appropriate function.  
 
4. The period spent elsewhere on deputation/ lien/ extra -ordinary leave by an 
employee will not be counted towards total service period for eligibility of this award . 
 
5. In case of misconduct where disciplinary action was initiated and minor penalty 
was imposed, the employee will be eligible for this award ten years ’ after 
completion of penalty . 
 
6. In ca se of misconduct where disciplinary action was initiated and major penalty 
was imposed, the employee will not be eligible for this award . 
 
7. This award in no way will entitle any contract employee to claim permanent 
employment at the Institute.  
 
8. The award is  mere recognition of serving the Institute for a long period of ten 
years and does not endorse performance of the employee. It will not lead to any 
weightage to an employee for getting promotion or selection to higher post.  
 
9. Standing Committee on Faculty A ffairs will decide on faculty eligible for the award 
in a year, while for staff the decision will be taken by the Standing Committee on 
Staff Affairs.  
 General Administration Advisory 15 (Version 1.0, April  201 6) Page 1 of 1 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 
PRIVATE USE OF INSTITUTE VEHICLES  
 
 
1. The Institute is not in a position to provide vehicle/transport for faculty and staff, 
in general.  
2. In case of official visits, the faculty/staff may avail services of the com mercial 
taxi and claim the same along with the TA bills. However, if a request  is 
received for providing transport for official purpose well ahead of time 
(minimum 72 hours in advance) , vehicle may be provided depending on the 
availability . The request is required to be submitted in the prescribed format.  
3. Request s for vehicles for private use also need to be submitted 72 hours in 
advance in the same format as for official trips  and the vehicle  may be provided 
depending on the availability. However, t he allo tment  may be cancelled, if the 
assigned vehicle is required for official use around the same time.  
4. In case of private use, the charges will be as under.  
Hospital/Airport/Railway Station  etc drop or pick  
 Small vehicle (Indica/ Indigo type)  = Rs. 1000/- 
 Bigger vehicle (Innova type)  = Rs. 1 800/- 
An additional sum of Rupees 100 per hour or part there of will be charged if 
the waiting time exceeds  one hour.  
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 26 (Version 1.0, January 2021)                                                     Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR UPGRADATION OF PROFESSORS AFTER SIX YEARS OF 
REGULAR SERVICES  
(As approved by the BoG in its 30th meeting held on 17 December 2020)  
 
 
As per the provisions of MHRD letter F.No. 23 -1/2008 –TS.II  dated 18 August 
2009 and F.No. 15 -4/2017 –TC dated 27 October 2017, Professors of IITs are eligible 
for upgradation to erstwhile HAG scale (Pay Level -15 as per 7th Central Pay 
Commission). As per the order, a Professor after six years of regular service in  Pay 
Level -14A (erstwhile AGP of ₹10,500/ -) will be eligible for upgradation. Further, upto 
a maximum of 40% of the posts of Professors at any given point of time will be 
eligible for upgradation to Pay Level -15 (Pay of ₹1,82,200/ - to ₹2,24,100/ -).  
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 30th meeting held on 17 
December 2020  approved the following norms for upgradation of Professor s after six 
years of regular services . 
 
a) A Professor may apply for the upgradation anytime after 5 years of regular 
service in Pay Level -14A.  
 
b) The candidates will prepare and submit a dossier detailing their contributions to 
teaching, research and service.  
 
c) The expectations of the Institute from its faculty are divided into four main 
categories: (i ) teaching (ii) research (iii) service and (iv) personal and 
interpersonal skills. Performance in all of these categories will form the basis for 
upgradation of candidates to Pay Level -15. Excellence in at least two of the 
categories (i), (ii) and (iii) an d a decent performance in the remaining two 
categories is expected from a successful candidate. A higher emphasis will be 
given to performance of the last six years. Seniority can be a consideration but it 
will not be the main factor in the evaluation.  
 
d) A Selection Committee will evaluate the dossiers and make recommendations for 
approval of the Chairman, Board of Governors.  
 
e) The Selection Committee will consist of the Director as the Chair and three to 
four members drawn from i) current and former Direc tors of IITs/IISc/IISERs,                 
ii) current and former Council nominees on the IITGN Board of Governors, and  
iii) current and former Visitor’s Nominees for IITGN.  
 
f) Successful upgradations will be effected from the day the Chairman, Board of 
Governors approves the Selection Committee recommendations or the candidate 
completes six years of service in Pay Level -14A, whichever is later.   
Academic Affairs Advisory 04 (Version 1.0, July 2012)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
RETENTION OF ACADEMIC DOCUMENTS  
 
(Senate in its 4thmeeting held on 2nd December  2010 approved the following ) 
 
Sr. 
No. Particulars  Guidelines for Retention of Documents  
1 Assignment items  The Hard copy assignments for a course / lab. / Project / Seminar etc. 
be returned to the respective student as soon as the assessment is 
completed and marks / grade obtained are tabulated by the course 
instructor.  
2 Answer Scripts of  
 Quiz  
 Class Tests  
 Mid-Semester  The answer scripts of Quizzes / Class Tests / Mid -semester 
examination be returned to the respective student as soon as the 
assessment is completed and marks / grades obtained by the student 
is tabulated by the course instructor. The unclaimed  answer scripts 
may be retained with the course instructor / departmental office, until 
the Semester – end examination is concluded and final marks / grade 
are awarded.  
3 Answer Script of 
Semester End 
Examination  The Answer Scripts of the Semester –End–Examination and or 
Semester -End-Re-Examination ( as the case may be ) be retained by 
the Course Instructor / Departmental office for a period of one 
semester from the date of examination.  
The Answer Script thus retained for a semester may be given back to 
the students on their request or be disposed off by the course 
instructor / departmental office by shredding them.  
4. Laboratory Journals, 
Seminar / Project 
Reports.  The Laboratory Journ als / Seminar / Project reports and any other 
such assignments in hard copy form may be returned to the students 
for their reference.  
The Laboratory Journals, Report of Seminar / Project etc.  if  not 
claimed by student with in a semester from the date of conclusion of 
the semester may be disposed off by the course instructor / 
departmental office by shredding them after retaining them for a 
semester.  Under no circumstances the disposal should be in “intact” 
form.   
5. Answer Scripts / 
Reports / Journals in 
electronic form  Documents in electronic form shall be retained for a period of 3 
months on the Institute server, and the same shall be disposed off by 
deleting the electronic files. If case of important documents, the same 
may be kept with the Library of the Institute in electronic form for 
further reference as the case may be.  
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
EXPECTATIONS FROM THE FACULTY BY THE INSTITUTE  
 
IIT Gandhinagar aspires to be recognized for excellence in education, research, innovation , and 
leadership. A thriving atmosphere is envisioned at the Institute where each faculty member is able to 
realize his/her potential and enthusiastically contributes to the growth of the Institute. All faculty 
members are expected to share the mission, vis ion, and values of the Institute, possess excellent 
personal and interpersonal skills and demonstrate a passionate commitment towards teaching, research, 
and service to the Institute , the profession, and the society at large.  This document lays out the 
expectations from the Institute’s faculty members. The Institute and the community will provide all 
possible support - financial, management, ambience – to help the faculty member realize his/her 
potential and aspirations.  
  
Teaching  
  IIT Gandhinagar believe s that teaching is a noble profession and is committed to providing an 
enriching and supportive learning environment for its students. Faculty members are expected to 
share this enthusiasm and approach teaching with the utmost sincerity and vigour.  
 Facult y members are given ample autonomy in structuring the course contents, course materials, 
introducing new courses, and using innovative methods of teaching.  
   Normal  teaching  load is three full -semester courses per year for a faculty member. Whenever 
possi ble, the teaching load may be lower (two courses per year) in the first year for an entry -level 
faculty member to enable him/her to settle down and establish his/her research activities quickly.   
  High -quality teaching in a range of courses is expected fr om all faculty members along with 
excellent feedback and rating from the students. The expected rating is 3.0 (out of 4.0) or higher.  
  Faculty members are expected to offer project courses and guide innovative student projects.  
  Developing textbooks/mono graphs/articles on teaching methodology, and developing course 
websites (or online course platforms) with electronic lecture notes, slides, and assignments are 
encouraged .  
   Best practices, as well as Institute norms on teaching, are to be followed.  
 
Research    
 Securing external funds for research and developing research facilities, infrastructure, and 
laboratories at the Institute.  
  Independent research leading to the publication of scholarly research papers/monographs. The 
Institute expects 2 -3 publ ications per year in reputed refereed journals/refereed conference 
proceedings  (excluding those with their own PhD /post -doc supervisors).  
   IITGN most values impact  of one’s research. Publications in very selective or prestigious 
conferences and journals are valued over multiple low -quality publications. Publishing software, 
patents, and doing technology transfers are encouraged.   
    Research with impact on societal needs is particularly appreciated.  
 Guiding PhD and Masters student dissertations  and under graduate research projects.  Mentoring 
students into future researchers and faculty members. This includes guiding students to publish their 
research (typically, with faculty as a co -author and students as lead authors).   
 Participation in conferences and re search talks at other institutions is encouraged to improve 
external impact and help establish research collaborations.  
 
  Service  
 Enthusiastic  and effective  participation in committees  and other administrative activities .   Engagement of students outside the class, mentoring/guiding them.  
 Helping other colleagues to grow and perform better.  
 Participation in external committees (government/industry), PhD thesis examination, etc.  
 Providing consultancy services to the industry  and government.  
 Editing/peer -reviewing for journals and other publications.  
 Community outreach activities based on societal needs.  
 Organization of continuing education programmes/conferences/workshops.  
Personal & Interpersonal Skills  
 Intense desire t o learn and to grow as an academic, and as an individual.  
 Positive attitude, strong commitment, enthusiastic participation in Institute activities.   
 Inspiring  students and leading by example.  
 Treating students and colleagues with dignity and respect.   
 Good inter -personal relationships; being a good team player; good communication skills.   
 Integrity (moral, intellectual, and financial)  
 Appropriate presence in the Institute’s academic area.  
Support from the Institute  
The Institute will provide a fully functional office when a new faculty member joins. This includes a 
desktop computer, printer, etc. Additionally, Rs. 2.5 lakh will be made available upon joining to meet 
miscellaneous initial expenses such as purchase of a laptop, tablet, additional desktop, etc.  
Each faculty member is expected to develop and submit at least one research proposal for external 
funding within 60 days of joining the Institute. If a faculty member does not intend to seek an external 
grant, he /she is expected to explain the reasons in writing. For instance, some colleagues working in 
theoretical areas may not require funds for their research. A reasonable amount of additional internal 
research funds can be provided to assist the faculty members  to initiate research activity quickly; the 
amount will depend on the requirements and the external project proposal.  
In addition to the above funding for research projects, current norms on faculty compensation provide a 
discretionary Cumulative Professi onal Development Allowance (CPDA) of Rs 1,00,000 (Rs One Lakh) 
per year to faculty members. This fund can be used for travel to attend meetings in India and overseas, 
purchase of equipment and books, membership of professional societies, etc. This allowanc e can be 
accumulated up to Rs 3,00,000 (Rs Three Lakhs).  
Sponsored research projects attract an overhead of 20% currently, but the Institute is flexible on this 
account and will be willing to accept lower overheads where appropriate. Currently, the Instit ute 
provides 12.5% of this overhead amount for professional development of the concerned faculty 
members. At present, the Institute also charges an overhead of 20% of gross receipts of consulting 
projects, while 80% funds are made available for discretiona ry spending towards project activities and 
for distribution of honoraria to the concerned faculty members. Consulting money may also be saved  
with the Institute in a separate Professional Development Allowance (PDA) for future use on 
professional activitie s. IITGN imposes no upper limit on consulting income a faculty member may earn, 
as long as his/her other academic responsibilities are not compromised. It is expected that a faculty 
member will spend, on an average, no more than one day per week on consult ancy work.    
When a faculty member brings in his/her research funds , he/she controls it as the Principal Investigator, 
subject to only the constraints that may be imposed by the sponsoring agency. IITGN ensures that there 
are no hurdles in spending the mo ney for executing the projects and provides excellent administrative 
support. The Institute envisages that with adequate external funding, each faculty member is fairly 
autonomous  to seek fulfillment of his/her aspirations and goals.     Academic Affairs Advisory 42 (November 2023)  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  NORMS FOR EARLY ADMIT MTech PROGRAMME  (As approved by the BoG in its meeting held on 16 May 2016 and  updated in the 65th meeting of the Senate)  1. Introduction: The Early Admit MTech programme is aimed at admitting top students from reputed colleges in the country to the MTech programme of IIT Gandhinagar in the fourth year of their BTech/BE programme.  2. Eligibility:  § Final year BTech (or equivalent undergraduate degree in Engineering) students from NITs with a CPI/ CGPA of not less than 8.0 at the end of their 3rd year for candidates from General/EWS/OBC categories OR CPI/ CGPA of not less than 7.5 at the end of their 3rd year for candidates from SC/ST/PwD categories. Students who are among the top 5 rank holders in the departments at the end of their pre-final year for General/EWS/OBC categories or top 10 rank holders in the departments at the end of their pre-final year for candidates from SC/ST/PwD categories and who do not meet the CPI/ CGPA criteria as mentioned here shall also be eligible. § Final year BTech (or equivalent undergraduate degree in Engineering) students from select colleges who are among the top 5 rank holders in the departments at the end of their pre-final year for candidates from General/EWS/OBC categories or top 10 rank holders in the departments at the end of their pre-final year for candidates from SC/ST/PwD categories. § Students from Final year BTech (or equivalent undergraduate degree in Engineering) from IITs with a CPI/CGPA of not less than 6.0 at the end of their 3rd year. § A valid GATE score will not be mandatory.  3. Scholarship: A scholarship to support the selected students shall be provided for a maximum of 24 months. The current fellowship rates are:   § With a valid GATE score: Rs. 12,400/- + Rs. 3000/- (additional fellowship) per month § Without a valid GATE score: Rs. 6,000/- per month  A student may join without GATE score, but in first year of MTech may appear in GATE. If s/he qualifies, the scholarship from prospective date (after passing the GATE) will be enhanced.  4. Tuition fee, curriculum structure and other regulations: The fees structure, the curriculum as well as other regulations will be same as that of the regular MTech programme at IIT Gandhinagar.  5. Selection process: The students will be selected from reputed academic institutions of the country based on the past academic performance (current rank in the class as certified by the authorities in the parent institute), a written test and/or an interview. The students eligible for Start Early PhD programme will also be eligible for this programme. The list of institutions considered for this programme will be same as that for the Start Early PhD programme.  6. Continuation of additional fellowship: The continuation of additional fellowship beyond the first semester is subject to the student maintaining a CPI 8.0 and above. In addition, the additional fellowship may be discontinued if a student secures a U grade (or F grade) in his/her MTech thesis units. General Administration Advisory 18 (Version 4.0, November  202 3) Page 1 of 1 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 
IITGN RESIDENTIAL  ACCOMMODATION  
(As approved by the BoG in its 17th meeting held on 31 July 2015, 29th meeting held on 20 August 2020 , 
34th meeting held on 28 April 2022 ) 
 
 
1. The six types of the accommodations available  at the Institute have the following 
classification and eligibility criteria as per pay levels of the 7th CPC . 
 
Types of 
Houses  Living Area  No. of Units 
Available  Eligibility in -terms of 
Pay Levels  Remarks  
Type -A 149.09 Sqm  
+12.23 Sqm 
(Helper Qtr .) 45 Pay Level 14 and above  3 BHK + Helper 
Quarter  
Type -B 106.60 Sqm  135 Pay Level 10A, 11, 12, 
13 and 13A  2.5 BHK 
Type -C 76.37 Sqm  90 Pay Level 07, 08 , 09 
and 10  2 BHK 
Type -D 62.17 Sqm  36 Pay Level 04, 05 and 06  2 BHK  
Type -E 39.58 Sqm  27 Pay Level 01, 02 and 03  1 BHK  
Type -F 29.98 Sqm  102 Married PG Students  Studio Apartments  
 
2. Each allottee of the residential accommodation will be charged  
- License Fee,  
- Water and Sewer Maintenance Charges , and  
- HMC Maintenance Charges . 
 
3. The current charges for the six types of accommodations  are as under:  
 
Types of 
Accommodation  Living 
area (in 
Sqm ) License Fee 
(w.e.f. 01 Nov 
2023) Water & Sewer 
Maintenance 
Charges   
(w.e.f. 01 Apr 2018) HMC Maintenance 
Charges  
(w.e.f 01 Apr 202 2) 
Type -A 161.32 
(149.09 
+12.23 
Helper Qtr .) Rs. 2,260/ - (Rs. 
2,170/ - + Rs. 
90/- for Helper 
Qtr.) Rs.320/- Rs.2250 /- 
Type -B 106.60 Rs. 1,750/ - Rs.320/- Rs.1500 /- 
Type -C 76.37 Rs. 930/ - Rs.320/- Rs.1050 /- 
Type -D 62.17 Rs. 660/ - Rs.320/- Rs.900/- 
Type -E 39.58 Rs. 440/ - Rs.250/- Rs.600/- 
Type -F 29.98 Rs. 210/ - Rs.215/- Rs.500/- 
 
4. The allottees will not be eligible for the House Rent Allowance (HRA) from the 
date of occupancy.  
 
 Academic Affairs Advisory 11(Version 1.1, March 2024) Page 1  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR NORMS FOR BRANCH CHANGE  [As approved by erstwhile Academic Council in its 4th meeting held on 15 June 2009]  The norms for change of branch in the BTech programme at IIT Gandhinagar is as follows:   § Any student with CPI greater than or equal to 9.50 will be allowed a change of branch without restriction.  § For others, change will be permitted in the order of their merit determined by their respective CPI. Only those students with CPI greater than or equal to 6.50 and without any fail grade/backlogs will be eligible to apply. [Note: Fail grade/backlogs also include first year BTech/BTech-MTech courses which were dropped before the end of the 1st/2nd semester, courses which were prescribed for first year BTech/BTech-MTech students but were not registered for, fail grades in courses with zero credit like Physical Education course(s), fail grades in courses with only Pass/Fail grade like General Education etc.] § The request for change (in the order of merit) for student S1 from branch A to branch B will be considered if -  (a) Strength of branch B does not exceed by more than 10% over the sanctioned strength for that branch. (b) Number of students on rolls in the branch A does not fall below 50% of the sanctioned strength. (c) The request of S1 will be re-considered (again in the order of merit) due to another student getting transfer to branch A, provided this re-consideration does not violate (b) above.  § All such transfers can be effected only once at the beginning of the second academic year. No application for change of branch during the subsequent academic years will be entertained. Note: The CPI used for branch change is only based on courses which are prescribed for first year BTech/BTech-MTech students of a particular batch. Additional courses, if any completed, will not be counted towards the CPI used for branch/programme change.    Guideline  for conduct ing a Ph.D.  thes is defense   
 
 
Scheduling  and conduct of the defense: 
 
1. After the Final  Defense Co mmitt ee (FDC) / Oral Board gets approved, the studen t needs  to share  
(via email/Goog le drive, etc.) the revised version of the thesis and his/her replies to the 
reviewers’ comments to all members of the FDC  / Oral Board (cc: phdthesis@iitgn.ac. in) at least 
7-days before the defense.  
2. The FDC / Oral Board members are expected to go through  the thesis and the studen ts’ 
responses  to the reviewers’ comments. Any issues  on this front may be flagged  to the 
Associate Dean (PG) at least 3 days  before the defense.  
3. The supe rvisor shou ld make a formal announce ment of the defense to all faculty and all Ph.D.  
studen ts of the institute, all FDC / Oral Board members, and  other  PG studen ts of the discipline 
(cc: acade mics@iitgn.ac. in).  
4. There  should  be a gap of at least  10 days between the date of the form al announ cement and the 
date of the defense. 
5. The conduct of the defense (including invitation of the examiner, scheduling, making announcements, 
booking rooms, arranging snacks, coordinating with hospitality team for pickup/drop from airport/guest 
house/Institute, IT support help etc.) is completely managed by the DSC convener, who is the supervisor of 
the student.  
 
After the defense  (for student ): 
 
1. An oral examination report form is available on IWS. After the  defense, please get all fields filled by the 
examiners and  submit  it (hard copy) to the academic office. Please recheck the title of the  thesis  in this form 
before  submitting  the completed form.  
2. The sitting fees for the examiner will be transferred to his/her account directly. Please visit the academic 
office and inform the  date of  defense  for approval of the sitting fees. You may also send an email to Chirag 
and let him know the  defense  date once it is decided.  Unless this information is received from your side, 
the academic office will not be able to process the sitting fe es of the examiner.    
3. The TA/DA reimbursement and  accommodation of the external examiners  are to be handled by your 
discipline. Please collect the tickets and boarding pass from the examiner and include it in the TA bill. Get a 
signature of the examiner on the tickets and the boarding pass.   
4. The conduct of the  defense  (including the invitation of the examiner, scheduling, making announcements, 
booking rooms, IT support help, etc.) is completely managed by the DSC c onvener, who is the supervisor of 
the student.  
5. After the  defense  (after incorporating all corrections), arrange to  submit  one hardbound copy of the  thesis  to 
the Library.  
6. You can initiate no dues formalities once the Chairman, Senate signs the  defense  report. 
7. A provisional degree is awarded on completion of no dues formalities.  
 
 Identify the supplier and ensure the product is competitively priced
Take advance
Indenter
PurchasePurchase Procedure for items of value < Rs. 50,000•This is the simplest of the purchase process. •Is applicable regardless of the source being domestic or foreign. •Does not require any Pre-audit or Internal approval. •Can be executed either through cash advance from any approved project (internal or external) and settled against the bill of purchase or request can be forwarded to MM section to be executed along with details of the supplier and item to be purchased.
Purchase the Product
Settle advance against the actual bill
Send purchase request to Stores and Purchase Section  (SPS) also known as Materials Management (MM) section along with quotation from the supplier and approved Purchase proposal form
SPS executes the purchase process but indenter is recommended to stay in touch with supplier and monitor the process
Purchase directly from the vendor and forward the invoice to R&D/Accounts (depending upon source of payment) for payment.
Purchase the product and submit the invoice for reimbursementSurvey the local market for availability of product and its cost
Prepare technical speciﬁcation of the desired product.
Indenter
PurchasePurchase Procedure for items of value between Rs. 50,000 and Rs. 1,50,000•This mode is currently applicable for local (Ahmedabad-Gandhinagar region) purchase only. •Does require pre-approval before purchase through appropriate purchase proposal form (PPF). •Involves setting up of local purchase committee approved by the HOD. Current committee consists of Mr. Ram Babu Bhagat, Mr. Rajendra Vaishnav and the Indenter.
Fill out the PPF and get it approved
Forward the approved PPF and technical speciﬁcation to SPS along with details of at least 3, possibly more, local suppliers
SPS invited sealed quotations from suppliers and needs at least 3 bids to go ahead with the purchase
Bid is opened and lowest  cost supplied is awarded the order.Equipment to be purchased
Technical spec gets uploaded as Tender document
Prepare PPRF and get it approved 
Talk to the indenter
Prepare appropriate technical spec
Talk to potential vendors
Talk to Purchase ofﬁce for the modality* of your equipment
Does it exist in IITGN ?
3 or more bids received 
Extend the closing deadline
Call for technical opening of bid
Form the technical evaluation committee
Technical evaluation and recommendations from the committee for ﬁnancial opening of selected bids
Vendors called for ﬁnancial opening of the bid
Purchase Documents prepared
Internal and External Audit
PO raised by IITGN and vendor acknowledges.
Installation and installation report approval
Indenter
Purchase
Financial Recommendation sheet prepared for selected vendorYesNoYesNoPurchase Procedure for items of value > Rs.1,50,000
Rough draft of L/C is shared with vendor to verify terms and conditionsIn case of foreign supplier
L/C is established
Custom Clearance is done through contracted IITGN agentItem is despatchedItem is despatchedGeneral Administration Advisory 16 (Version 1.0, September  201 6) Page 1 of 1 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 
ISSUE OF STATIONERIES FROM INSTITUTE STORES  
 
 
1. The Central Store under Material Management Section issues stationeries as per 
requisition of the faculty and staff for various purposes.  Henceforth stationeries 
shall be issue d only to cover administrative needs to persons heading 
administrative sections, like the PICs, Deans, Registrar, Deputy/ Assistant 
Registrars, Conveners of Senate Committees, Associate Deans, Coordinators of 
Academic Disciplines, Conveners of Ins titute Level Committees, Superintending 
Engineer, Librarian, Director’s Office and Officers heading section like External 
Relations.  
2. Faculty can use their CPDA/PDA/R&D grants for purpose of research related 
stationery requirements. In case stationery is pr ovided by the stores for such 
purpose, the amount will be debited from the CPDA/PDA/R&D grant as per 
requisition. Any substantial expense on stationery by the faculty for teaching 
(particularly large classes) will be reimbursed.  
3. Stationery requirements dur ing seminars/ workshops/ conferences etc. are to be 
covered from corresponding budgetary provisions.   भारतीय  प्रौद्योगिकी  संस्थान  िांधीनिर  
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 Procedure for Medical Emergency Needs for Students of IITGN  
1 A medical emergency is a situation, caused by any injury or illness, which causes an immediate threat to a 
person’s health or life and requires instant medical help/aid for the welfare of the patient.  
 
2 The timings may change later. You can Follow emails from medical@iitgn.ac.in  for latest timings.  
 
1. This document outlines the medical facilities available for the students of IITGN and the procedures to 
be followed for dealing with the medical emergency1 needs of the students at the Institute campus, 
especially during off/odd hours and holidays. Further, for medical emergencies during office 
hours/working days, students are advised to approach Institute Medical Centre on the First Floor of the 
Central Arc ade building.  
 
Facilities and Procedures   
 
2. The Institute has a panel of six visiting medical consultants, including a specialist gynaecologist, dietician 
and physiotherapist. In addition, staff nurses and medical attendants are also available. The Institut e 
Medical Centre is open from 09.00 hours through 21.00 hours from Monday to Saturday and 10.00 hours 
to 13.00 and 17.00 hours to 21.00 hours on Sunday. IITGN medical center dispenses medicines without 
any charge. The visiting hours of medical consultants can be viewed at the Institute website  (Quick Links 
→ Campus Facilities →  Medical Facility ) or accessed here directly. A single centralized number, +91 -
7069795000 has been activated for all emergency needs. In case of an emergency, please call this 
number only and avoid calling the nurses/ do ctors directly on their personal phone numbers.  
 
Name & Designation  Designation  Emergency Contact 
No. 
Dr. K V Mehta  Medical Consultant  
+91-7069795000  Dr. Deepa Shah  Medical Consultant  
Dr. Mira Butani  Gynecologist  
Dr. Bhavesh Panchal  Medical Consultant  
Dr. Arvind Chauhan  Physiotherapist  
Dr. Priyam Sharma  Dietician  
Mr Mukesh Sharma  Senior Staff Nurse  
Mr. Haresh Chaudhari  Assistant Staff Nurse  
Ms Parulben Christian  Assistant Staff Nurse   
  
3. All on -roll students are covered under the Medical Insurance scheme for inpatient treatment. The 
insurance covers hospitalization expenses of up to ₹ 1,50,000/ -. Some other salient features of the 
Medical Insurance Policy are as below:  
● Room rent limit is 2% & 4% (per day) of Sum Insured for Normal & ICU/ICCU respectively. Accordingly, 
the upper limit of room rent is Rs. 3,000/ - per day for normal hospitalization and Rs. 6,000/ - for 
ICU/ICCU treatment.  Students can avail rooms within these specified upper l imits of room rent. 
Students may note that the insurance claim covers only the expenses corresponding to these eligible 
room rent charges. In case a student opts for a hospital room having rent charges more than the 
above -prescribed room rent limits, the d ifference of charges for the room rent shall be payable by the 
concerned student only.  
● Students get cover from Day 1.  
● Cashless hospitalization facility for empanelled hospitals (including provisioning medical health cards 
for the insured students).  
● Ambula nce Charges covered upto Rs. 2,500/ - per claim.  
 
4. Cashless transaction facility for hospitalization expenses under the Mediclaim policy has been provided 
to the students (as per coverage of the policy). Health cards for the medical insurance facility are is sued 
to the students through the Student Affairs Office. This card facilitates cashless treatment in any hospital 
across India which is on the panel list of the insurance company for this purpose (to the extent of coverage 
limit).  
 
5. Presently, the Institute  has an agreement with nine hospitals in Gandhinagar/ Ahmedabad. These 
hospitals admit students without any advance deposit and the charges are at the agreed concessional 
rates. Details of these hospitals are mentioned below.  
 
S.No.  Name of the Hospital &  Address   Contact number  
1. Apollo Hospitals International Limited   
Plot No.1 A, Bhat GIDC Estate,  
Gandhinagar – 382428  Emergency:079 -66701866  
General:079 -
66701800/01/03  
Appointment Desk: 079 - 
66701880  
2. Aashka Hospital   
Near DA -IICT, Gandhinagar Bypass Rd, Sargasan, Gandhinagar  +91-9879752777, 
7575009000, 7575006000  
3. Pagarav Hospital  
Plot No 512/1, Nr. G -6 Circle, Opp. SBI, Sector -23, Gandhinagar 
382023  08980809753,089808 09754  
4. Shalby Hospital   
Opp. Karnavati Club, S. G. Road, Ahmedabad 380015  079-40203000, 
Appointment:079 -40203154, 
40203138   
 5. HCG Hospital, Ahmedabad   
Mithakhali Six Road, Kalyan Society, Maharashtra Society, 
Ellisbridge, Ahmedabad, Gujarat 380006  079-40010101, +91 -
9099712345  
6. KD Hospitals , Ahmedabad  
SG Road, Vaishnodevi Cir, Ahmedabad, Gujarat 382421  079-6677 0000  
7. SGVP Holistic Hospital , Ahmedabad   
SGVP Campus, Sarkhej - Gandhinagar Highway, Chharodi, Gujarat 
382481  +91-95122 00129  
8. Sterling Hospital, Ahmedabad   
Sterling Hospital Rd, near Nilmani Society, near Maharaja Agrasen 
Vidyalaya, L.K Society, Nilmani Society, Memnagar, Ahmedabad, 
Gujarat 380052  079-4001 1111  
9. Zydus Hospitals, Ahmedabad  
Nr. Sola Bridge, S.G. Highway, Ahmedabad, Gujarat  
380054  079-6619 0 201 
 
The hospitals listed above offer cashless transaction facilities for hospitalization expenses under the 
Mediclaim policy as per the above mentioned provisions. However, in case of emergency, the students can 
seek indoor treatment at any other nearby hospit al as well and intimate the Institute within 24 hrs of 
hospitalization.  
 
Procedure for Medical Emergency  
 
6. In case of a medical emergency, the student or his/her well -wisher may immediately contact the Institute's 
resident hostel caretaker (Vishwajeet Mish ra +91 9898037530) or other caretakers mentioned at Para 
13. The Caretaker/ well -wisher should also inform the Warden, Student Welfare immediately. You can 
also contact the Welfare Secretary  (Harshvardhan Vala +91- 8140317228)  or Student Health Secretary  
(Monika Jain +91 8120870890).  
7. The well -wisher (or Caretaker/Warden as the case may be) should immediately, in consultation with the 
Medical Consultant, decide where the patient should be taken for medical help. Depending on the severity 
of the case, the Me dical Consultant may direct the resident Nurse/Medical Assistant/Caretaker to 
accompany the patient or may choose to himself go with the patient to a suitable hospital.  
8. In order to transport a patient under an emergency situation to the nearest hospital, a n ambulance is also 
available on campus 24x7. To avail of the ambulance services, you may contact Vishwajeet Mishra 
(9898037530) or the Medical Centre (079 -2395 -1116, landline number, operational between 09:00 am 
to 09:00 pm) or directly call for ambulance  services (7359333351) or emergency services (7069795000).  
9. In case the ambulance is unavailable, an Institute owned Car could be availed with the permission of the 
concerned Medical Consultant/ Warden/Associate Dean, SW/ Dean (SA).   
 10. Security Supervisors are  also authorized to provide Car in an acute emergency without prior approval of 
the authorities. However, the Security Supervisor will immediately inform the Warden (Student Welfare)/ 
Assistant Registrar (Student Affairs) on phone about the incident/emerge ncy and the assistance 
provided.  
11. All cases of emergency and hospitalization of a student must be reported to the Warden (Student Welfare) 
/ Assistant Registrar (Student Affairs) at the earliest possible.  
12. Telephone numbers of key personnel are as under.  
 
Officials  Mobile Number  Office Number  
Mr. Ramsingh Airi, Caretaker  +91-9687460280   079-2395 1241  
Ms. Anita Vaghela, Caretaker  +91-9512389739  079-2395 1239  
Ms. Priyanka Vaghela, Caretaker  +91-6353228604  079-2395 1231  
Mr. Pankaj A Bihola, Caretaker  +91-9904883975  079-2395 1233  
Mr.Jaimin Parmar, Caretaker  +91-6352543621  079-2395 1240  
Mr. Anil Solanki, Caretaker  +91-7600738945  079-2395 1237  
Mr Vishwajeet Kumar, Caretaker  +91-7061573044  079-2395  1238  
Mr. Ramprakash Lembabai  
(Night Caretaker)  +91-9727309898  079-2395 1236  
Mr. Darshan Patel, Assistant (SA)  +91-9904353778  079-2395 1140  
Ms. Sweta Bichhawat, Hostel Supdt.   079-2395 1131  
Ms. Barkha Govil, Hostel Supdt.   079-2395 1131  
Mr. Ishani Sutaria, AR SA   079-2395 2111  
Mr. Mukesh Sharma, Senior Staff Nurse  +91-7069795000  079-2395 1116  
Mr. Haresh Chaudhari,  Assistant Staff Nurse   +91-7069795000   079-2395 1116  
Ms. Parulben Christian, Assistant Staff Nurse  +91-7069795000  079-2395 1116  
Mr. Abhishek Mungekar , General Secretary  +91-9820075245  - 
Mr. Harshvardhan Vala, Welfare Secretary  +91-8140317228  - 
Ms. Monika Jain, Student Health Incharge  +91-8120870890  - 
 
13. Following is the standard procedure to be used for medical treatment:  
  
 a) For Outpatient treatment:   The Students can visit the Institute Medical Centre to avail the medical 
facilities. The medicines are generally available at the Institute Medical Centre and are dispensed 
free of charge. In case of non -availability of the prescribed medicines at the Medi cal Centre, the same 
can be purchased by the students from outside and the expenses shall be reimbursed upon request. 
In case of requirement of specialist consultation, the patient will be referred by the IITGN doctor to 
the specialist doctor for specialis t opinion/treatment. The student shall pay the specialist 
fees/treatment expenses upfront and subsequently claim reimbursement as per the procedure. 
Prescriptions for medicine/laboratory tests etc. need an endorsement of IITGN doctors before 
purchase/tests . The expenses for such OPD treatment is also reimbursable. Make sure to show an 
Institute ID card while taking the treatment from the above mentioned empanelled hospitals 
to avail the discounted rates.  In case of dental/eye treatment, the reimbursement i s capped 
to 1.75 times of the CGHS rates. Hence please seek guidance from the Student Affairs office 
before seeking dental/eye treatment outside.  
b) The above expenditure will not be reimbursed when the student is away from the campus (viz. 
semester drop, vis iting home, on leave, etc.). However, if the student is away from campus 
“on duty” (viz. domestic internship, field trips etc.), reimbursement may be considered on a 
case -by-case basis.  
c) Procedure for claiming reimbursement of OPD expenses : The duly filled in OPD reimbursement 
form, supported by relevant documents including Institute Doctor’s prescription/referral is to be 
submitted by the claimant student at the Institute Medical Centre within a maximum time period of  
three months  of the referral/date of th e prescription. Upon submission of the documents, the medical 
reimbursement process generally takes upto a minimum of three weeks and the applicable amount 
is credited to the claimant student’s account. The reimbursement form is available at the Institute 
website, as per the details mentioned below.  
(IWS (Internal Website) → Forms  → Student Affairs  → Medical Claim Form (OPD)  ) or directly here.  
 
d) For Inpatient Treatment: As per the MoU between the Institute and the above named empanelled 
hospitals, a cashless hospitalization facility shall be provided by  all the above -mentioned hospitals to 
the IITGN students upon showing the institute ID card and the excess bill amount, if any, which is 
not covered under the medical insurance facility, shall be initially charged by the hospital to the 
Institute only and not to the hospitalized student(s), so as to facilitate timely and convenient discharge 
of student(s) from the hospital on completion of treatment. However, in case of emergency, the 
students can seek indoor medical emergency treatment at any other nearby hospital as well and 
intimate the Institute within 24 hrs of hospitalization.   
e) Procedure for settlement of student hospitalization bills: The bills generated by the empanelled 
hospital against referral of IITGN medical consultants for inpatient treatment will be processed for 
payment by the Student Affairs Section, IITGN. In cases where a cashless insurance facility is not 
provided upfront by the hospital, the bills will be forwarded to the Insurance Company for appropriate 
claim settlement. Finally, in ca se there is any excess amount (over and above the insurance claim 
settlement), paid by IITGN to the hospital, the same shall be intimated to the respective student and 
charged to him/her. The IPD Claim form is available at the Institute website, as per the  details 
mentioned below.   
 (IWS (Internal Website) → Forms  → Student Affairs  → Medical Claim Form (IPD)  ) or directly here.  
14. The norms for reimbursement for medical facilities are provided in Student Affairs Advis ory No.16 . 
15.  For any queries related to medical services, write to Health Committee IIT Gandhinagar at the email Id - 
health.committee@iitgn.ac.in    Research and Development Advisory 05  (Version 5.0, March 201 9)  Page 1  of 1 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR POST -DOCTORAL FELLOWSHIPS  
(As approved by the B oG in its sixth meeting held on 10 March 2012 and revised in  13th meeting held on 1 4 March 201 4,  
14th meeting held on 02 August 2014  and 25th meeting held on 03 December 2018 ) 
 
The Board of Governors of IIT Gandhinagar in its 13th meeting held on 14 March 2014 
approved amendments in the Post -Doctoral Fellowship Scheme of the Institute  which was 
originally  approved in sixth meeting held on 10 March 2012 . The revised scheme  is as 
under : 
 
1. Minimum Qualifications:  
Recent PhD or waiting for Defence  after submission of thesis (if admissible). Candidates 
who have completed their earlier post -doctoral fellowship assignment are also eligible.  
 
2. Fellowship amount:  
Fellowship amount for a candidate will be fixed initially in the range of Rs.45,000 to 
Rs.60,000 pm depending on qualifications and experience. This range may be revised 
upwards periodically, typically once a year, to keep up with inflation.  However, depending on 
qualifications and experience of the candidate , offer of fellowship amount can also be lower 
than this range.  
Upon completion of one year, based on a performance review, the fellowship amount may 
be enhanced by up to (RI +3) percent where RI is the prevailing rate of inflation.  
A sum of Rs. 11,000 be provided as HRA in lieu of campu s housing.  
 
3. Contingency Grant:  
The PDF is primarily targeted to do full -time research in conjunction with a faculty at IIT 
Gandhinagar along with a few hours of teaching/ tutorials/ laboratory instructions per week.  
A sum of Rs. 1.00 lakh per year may be provided for reimbursement of p rofessional 
expenses on travel, books, stationary, laptop, etc. This will be handled in the same manner 
as the Central Professional Development Fund of faculty is being handled by the Institute.  
 
4. Medical Benefits:  
Medical benefits for self, spouse and children may be provided at par with those provided to 
the faculty of IITGN.  
 
5. Leave:  
PDF will be provided  Casual Leave of 8 days, Restricted Holidays of 2 days during each 
calendar year and Earned Leave for  2.5 days per month  of service. Any Earned lea ve 
unavailed by you may be carried forward and shall not be encashable.   
 
6. Reimbursement of travel expenses and accommodation at the time of interview :  
Candidates called for interview would be provided accommodation and would be eligible for 
reimburseme nt of train fare by II A.C.  
 
7. Duration of the appointment:  
One year and may be extended on mutual requirement and availability. Duration cannot 
exceed three years.  
 
8. Discipline of Research:  
In all areas of engineering, sciences and humanities subject to the interest of the concerned 
faculty.  Student Affairs Advisory 01  (June 2021) Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
STUDENT AFFAIRS  
NORMS FOR MEDALS, AWARDS AND PRIZES  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 7th meeting held on 23rd June 2012)  
The following medals, awards and prizes are instituted with their respective selection criteria. Senate 
Scholarships and Prizes Committee will review all cases for medals, awards and prizes and 
recommend which of those are to be given or not to be given in a p articular year.  
President’s Gold medals:  
 One medal for B.Tech programme  
Criteria: Highest CPI among those B.Tech students from graduating batch who have 
completed their graduation requirements that year.  
 One medal for M.Tech programme  
Criteria: Highest CPI  among the M.Tech students graduating that year.  
 
 One medal for M Sc and MA  programme  
Criteria: Highest CPI among the MSc and MA  students graduating that year.  
Institute Gold and Silver medals:  
 One Institute Gold medal for B.Tech programme in each discipline  
Criteria: Highest CPI among those B.Tech students from graduating batch in the discipline 
who have completed their graduation requirements that year.  
 One Institute Silver medal for B.Tech programme in each discipline  
Criteria: Second highest CPI  among those B.Tech students from graduating batch in the 
discipline who have completed their graduation requirements that year.  
 
 One Institute Gold medal for M.Tech programme in each discipline  
Criteria: Highest CPI among the M.Tech students in the discipline who are graduating that 
year.  
 
 One Institute Silver medal for M.Tech programme in each discipline  
Criteria: Second highest CPI among the M.Tech students in the discipline who are graduating 
that year.  
 
 One Institute Gold  medal for M Sc programme in each discipline  
Criteria: Highest CPI among the M Sc students in the discipline who are graduating that year.  
 
 One Institute Silver medal for MSc programme in each discipline  
Criteria: Second highest CPI among the M Sc students in the discipline who are graduating 
that year.  
 
 One Institute Gold  medal for M A programme in each discipline  
Criteria: Highest CPI among the M A students in the discipline who are graduating that year.  
 
 One Institute Silver medal for MA programme in each discipline  
Criteria: Second highest CPI among the M A students in the discipline who are graduating that 
year.  
 
 Student Affairs Advisory 01  (June 2021) Page 2 
 Director’s Gold and Silver medals:  
 One Director’s Gold medal for B.Tech programme  
Eligibility: B.Tech student from graduating  batch who has completed the graduation 
requirements that year.  
 
 One Director’s Silver medal for B.Tech programme in each discipline  
Eligibility: B.Tech student from graduating batch in the discipline who has completed the 
graduation requirements that year . 
 
 One Director’s Gold medal for M.Tech programme  
Eligibility: M.Tech student graduating that year.  
 
 One Director’s Gold medal for MSc and MA  programme  
Eligibility: M Sc and MA  student graduating that year.  
 
 One Director’s Gold medal for Ph.D programme  
Criteria: Ph.D student graduating that year.  
Criteria: “Outstanding Overall Performance”  
Nominations: Nominations should be made in the format given below. Nomination can be made by 
any of the faculty or students of IIT Gandhinagar.  
Format for Nominations  
1. Name, Roll No, Discipline, Programme  
2. Details of academic achievements  
3. Details of achievements in Sports/Arts/Fine Arts/performing arts/ Tech events etc  
4. Details of the contribution to Social/Cultural/outreach activities  
5. Details of leadership & organizational skills  
6. A statement by the nominator not exceeding 500 words, highlighting the distinctive 
achievements of the nominee.  
 
Selection: The SSPC, which may co -opt certain members as deemed appropriate, would make 
recommendations.  
Gold Medal for Outstanding Innovation (combined for B.Tech, M.Tech , MSc, MA  & Ph.D 
programmes):  
Eligibility: All students graduating that year.  
Nominations: Nominations should be made in the format given below. Nomination can be made by 
any of the faculty or students  of IIT Gandhinagar.  
Format for Nominations  
1. Name, Roll No, Discipline, Programme  
2. Details of innovation  
3. A statement by the nominator not exceeding 500 words, highlighting the 
innovation/contributions to innovation by the nominee.  
 
Selection: The SSPC, which may co -opt certain members as deemed appropriate, would make 
recommendations.  Student Affairs Advisory 01  (June 2021) Page 3 
 Gold Medal  for Outstanding Social Service (combined for B.Tech, M.Tech , MSc, MA  & Ph.D 
programmes):  
Eligibility: All students graduating that year.  
Nominations: Nomin ations should be made in the format given below. Nomination can be made by 
any of the faculty or students of IIT Gandhinagar.  
Format for Nominations  
 
1. Name, Roll No, Discipline, Programme  
2. Details of Social service  
3. A statement by the nominator not exceeding 500 words, highlighting the nominee’s 
social outreach activities  
 
Selection: The SSPC, which may co -opt certain members as deemed appropriate, would make 
recommendations.  
Gold Medal for Integrity and Exemplary Human Qualities (combined for B.Tech , M.Tech , 
MSc, MA  & Ph.D programmes):  
Eligibility: All students graduating that year.  
Nominations: Nominations should be made in the format given below. Nomination can be made by 
any of the faculty or students of IIT Gandhinagar.  
Format for Nominations  
1. Name, Roll No, Discipline, Programme  
2. A statement by the nominator not exceeding 500 words, highlighting the positive 
influence of the nominee’s integrity and human qualities in the community.  
 
Selection: The SSPC, which may co -opt certain members as dee med appropriate, would make 
recommendations.  
Gold Medal  for the Outstanding Research:  
 One award for B.Tech programme  
 One award for M.Tech programme  
 One award combined for MSc and MA programme  
 One award for Ph.D programme  
 
Eligibility: All students graduating that year.  
Nominations: Nominations should be made in the format given below. Nomination can be made by 
any of the faculty or students of IIT Gandhinagar.  
Format for Nominations  
1. Name, Roll No, Discipline, Programme  
2. Details of research outp ut (Conference presentations, Journal Papers, patents, books 
etc) 
3. A statement by the nominator not exceeding 500 words, highlighting the research 
output of the nominee.  
 
Selection: The SSPC, which may co -opt certain members as deemed appropriate, would make 
recommendations.  Student Affairs Advisory 01  (June 2021) Page 4 
 Gold Medal  for Outstanding Performance in Sports (combined for B.Tech, M.Tech , MSc, MA  
& Ph.D programmes):  
 One award for overall outstanding performance in sports  
 One award for outstanding performance in athletics  
 One award for outstanding performance in aquatics  
 One award for outstanding performance in outdoor sports  
 One award for outstanding performance in indoor sports  
 
Eligibility: All students graduating that year.  
Nominations: Nominations should be made in the format given  below. Nomination can be made by 
any of the faculty or students of IIT Gandhinagar.  
Format for Nominations  
1. Name, Roll No, Discipline, Programme  
2. Details of achievements in sports and games.  
3. A statement by the nominator not exceeding 500 words, hig hlighting the achievements 
in sports and games.  
 
Selection: The SSPC, which may co -opt certain members as deemed appropriate, would make 
recommendations  
Gold Medal  for Outstanding Performance in Arts and Culture (combined for B.Tech, M.Tech , 
MSc, MA  & Ph.D programmes):  
Eligibility: All students graduating that year.  
Nominations: Nominations should be made in the format given below. Nomination can be made by 
any of the faculty or students of IIT Gandhinagar.  
Format for Nominations  
1. Name, Roll No, Discipline, Programme  
2. Details of achievements in Arts/Fine Arts/performing arts/Cultural events.  
3. A statement by the nominator not exceeding 500 words, highlighting the achievements 
in Arts/Fine Arts/performing arts/Cultural events.  
 
Selection: The SS PC, which may co -opt certain members as deemed appropriate, would make 
recommendations.  
Pioneer  Batch  Gold Medal  for Outstanding Leadership (combined for B.Tech, M.Tech , MS c, 
MA & Ph.D programmes):  
Eligibility: All students graduating that year.  
Nomination s: Nominations should be made in the format given below. Nomination can be made by 
any of the faculty or students of IIT Gandhinagar.  
Format for Nominations  
1. Name, Roll No, Discipline, Programme  
2. Details of the outstanding leadership role exhibited by the nominee  
3. A statement by the nominator not exceeding 500 words, highlighting the outstanding 
leadership role exhibited by the nominee.  
 
Selection: The SSPC, which may co -opt certain members as deemed appropriate, would make 
recommendations.  Student Affairs Advisory 01  (June 2021) Page 5 
 Gold Medal  for o utstanding performance in the courses of Humanities and Social Sciences:  
Eligibility: B.Tech student from graduating batch who has completed the graduation requirements 
that year.  
Criteria: The best performance inclusive of all the courses taken by t he student from Humanities and 
Social Sciences.  
Selection: The SSPC, which may co -opt a few course instructors as deemed appropriate, would make 
recommendations.  
Gold Medal  for the best performance in the core courses o f Engineering Graphics, and  
Manufactu ring and Workshop Practice : 
 
Eligibility: All 2nd year B.Tech student s who have completed their core -courses on Engineering 
Graphics, and Manufacturing and Workshop Practice.   
Criteria: The best performance inclusive of core -courses on Engineering Graphics, and 
Manufacturing and Workshop Practice.  
Selection: The SSPC with the assistance of course instructors would assess the performance of 
candidates in the relevant courses and make suitable recommendations.  
Gold Medal for the b est performance in the core courses of Mathematics:  
Eligibility: All 2nd year B.Tec h student s who have completed all the core -courses on Mathematics in 
the current academic year.   
Criteria: The best performance inclusive of all core -courses on Mathematics.  
Selection: The SSPC with the assistance of course instructors would assess the performance of 
candidates in the relevant courses and make suitable recommendations.  
Gold Medal  for the best performance in the core courses o f Physics, Chemistry and Life 
Sciences:  
Eligibility: All 2nd year B.Tech student s who have completed all the core -courses on Physics, 
Chemistry, and Life Sciences in the current academic year.   
Criteria: The best performance inclusive of all core -courses on Physics, Chemistry and Life Sciences.  
Selection: The SSPC with the assistance of course instructors would assess the performance of 
candidates in the relevant courses and make suitable recommendations.  
Gold Medal  for the best overall performance in the core courses of Humanities and Social 
Sciences:  
Eligibil ity: All 2nd year B.Tech student s who have completed the core -courses from Humanities and 
Social Sciences.  
Criteria: The best performance inclusive of the core -courses from Humanities and Social Sciences 
but excluding the first semester language course.  
Selection: The SSPC with the assistance of course instructors would assess the performance of 
candidates in the relevant courses and make suitable recommendations.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 34 (Version 1.0, February  2023 )                                       Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAG AR 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF PROF. SUDHIR K. JAIN  CHAIR   
(As approved by the BoG in its 36th meeting held on 17 December 2022) 
 
In pursuance of the MoU signed between the IIT Gandhinagar Foundation  (IITGNF)  in the 
US and IITGN, the Board of Governors of the Institute in its 36th meeting held on 17 
December 2022 approved to establish ‘Prof. Sudhir K. Jain Chair’.  
 
Prof. Sudhir K. Jain was the Founding Dire ctor of IIT Gandhinagar (IITGN) and held this 
office from June 2009 to January 2022. As the founding head of the institution, Prof. Jain 
was instrumental in building IIT Gandhinagar into a unique institution with a distinctive 
culture that is widely recogn ized within academic circles in India. The Donor (IITGN 
Foundation based in Palo Alto, California, USA) has set up this Chair to honour the work and 
legacy of Prof. Jain.  
 
The Chair will be offered to the Director of IIT Gandhinagar upon joining the Instit ute. The 
duration of the Chair position will be co -terminus with the tenure of the appointment as 
Director. Only a regular Director (and not an acting or officiating Director) will be eligible for 
award of the Chair .  
General Administration  Advisory 09 (Version 1.0, January  2014)                                Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS ON SHORT -TERM ADVANCE TO EMPLOYEES OF THE 
INSTITUTE  
 
The Board of Governors in it s 12th meeting held on 14th November 2013 has approved the 
scheme of short -term advance to employees of the Institute. The de tails of the scheme are 
as follows:  
 
1. The short term advances to the Institute employees will be made available for the 
purposes of illness, education, obligatory expenses, legal costs, purchase of 
consumer durables and pilgrimages.  
2. The maximum of advance  may be restricted to 3 months’ pay (sum of BS, GP & DA).  
3. Interest at the prevailing rate (on the date of sanction of advance) of public provident 
fund (PPF) shall be chargeable on the advance. The interest will be compounded 
monthly.  
4. The recovery of princ ipal and interest should be in maximum 36 equal monthly 
installments.  
5. The recovery starts from that month’s salary following the month, in which the 
advance is drawn by the employee.  
6. The amount of advance and number of installments of recovery, should be s uch that 
after the total deduction along with recoveries against other advances/loans/taxes 
etc. the take -home money for the employee does not fall below the statutory limit of 
percentage of the salary,  if any.  
7. A second advance under this scheme can be ta ken during the pendency of recovery 
of the previous advance under identical conditions, till the condition under (vi) is not 
violated.  
8. No applicant has any right to claim this short -term advance. The sanctioning 
authority, after due consideration of borrow ing habits and repaying capacity of the 
applicant, may approve the advance at his discretion.  
 1 
 
Annexure – I 
 
GUIDELINES FOR RESIDENTS  
 
1. Many pockets /areas of the campus are still a construction site, please be aware and considerate about the related 
inconveniences .  
2. No modification of the house whether minor or major, temporary or permanent, should be carried out without 
prior  written  approval of the Estate Officer, IITGN.  
3. For any electrical / civil maintenance issue you can log in to http://maintenance.iitgn.ac.in/  and lodge your 
comp lain online.  
4. Installation of Air conditioners  
a. Split AC units: refrigeration piping is provisioned for placing outdoor units of split ACs at the terrace for 
installing split ACs in the following:  
• Type A - In Master Bedroom, Bedroom 1 and Bedroom 2.  
• Type B - In Master Bedroom and Bedroom.  
• Type C – In Master Bedroom.  
 To install split ACs at any other location other than those specified above, the outdoor unit should be placed in 
 the verandah. The outdoor unit placed in verandah should not be below th e Jaali (Refer to point no -07 for 
 guidance on drilling).  
b. Window AC units: space is provided in windows of all bedrooms and study rooms for installation of 
window AC units.  
 
5. Use of loudspeakers is prohibited without written permission from Dean Campus Development and subsequently 
informing the Security Officer (Security Advisor) of IITGN.  
6. No vehicular traffic is allowed in the interior of the housing parcel area -- the interio r is designed to be pedestrian 
area only.  
7. Since the construction style is confined -masonry construction, all walls are load -bearing walls and therefore no 
modification in the walls is possible. While some minor installations such as small nails or hooks ar e permissible, 
extensive drilling is not allowed. Further, while installation of any nails or hooks, care is to be taken that none of 
the concealed wires or pipes is damaged. It is therefore desirable to consult the Estate Officer before such 
installations  are carried out.  
8. No personal dish antennas are permitted. Housing has central connections from cable TV provider and residents 
can directly use the wired infrastructure to subscribe.  2 
 
9. No sun -shades, awnings, semi -permanent or permanent sun shade structures  are permitted in the outdoor area 
without prior consent.  
10. The residents are expected to be courteous to the neighbo urs and generally observe quiet time from 10pm to 7am.  
11. It will be the sole responsibility of the residents to follow the waste segregation methods / guidelines as prescribed 
by the green office (Refer Annexure –II). Throwing of Garbage in and around the campus is strictly prohibited.  
12. The ground floor apartments are provided with a kitchen garden that can be utilized for domestic u se. It is 
encouraged to develop these as gardens or vegetable patches. No trees are however allowed in kitchen garden 
area.  
13. Spitting of pan masala, throwing cigarette butts / wrappers anywhere within the campus is strictly prohibited.  
14. No one is allowed to  serve food / water to the stray animals (including cats/ dogs roaming inside the residential 
area) except in areas designated for this specific purpose. Any engagement with stray animals that encourages 
their movement within the housing area is not allowe d. One should also not engage in  ill-treatment of stray 
animals and/  or displacing them from their natural habitat . If residents need clarification on this issue, they are 
advised to contact the Campus Animal Management Committee [amc@iitgn.ac.in] or the H ousing Management 
Committee [housingoffice@iitgn.ac.in].  
15. Pet dogs duly collared and chained can be kept inside the housing compound provided due precaution is taken to 
avoid any inconvenience to the neighbors. Immunization of pets is mandatory. Owners shou ld make sure that while 
walking their dogs inside the campus;  they should pick up their pets’ waste/ faeces  and dispose them off properly.  
16. Any commercial / industrial activity  inside the campus housing is not allowed . Anyhow,  employees of the Institute 
are not allowed to engage themselves in any kind of commercial / Industrial activities as per IITGN statute (conduct 
rules for employees).  
17. Rearing of cows, goats, buffalos etc. are not allowed.  
18. Please switch off electrical appli ances when not in use and save electricity.  
19. Please save and conserve water. Turn off the faucet when not in use.  
20. It is the responsibility of the resident to inform their domestic help regarding the above guideline  and to ensure 
compliance by them.  
21. All res idents shall have to follow the traffic rules as announced by the Institute / Housing Management Committee 
from time to time.  
 
 
 
  
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 
Conduct of Examinations  
 
For Faculty  
 
 The course is completely owned by the Instructor -in-charge from the beginning of the 
course to the submission of grades. 

 Responsibility for the smooth conduct of examinatio n lies with the Instructor.  The 
Instructors are expected to be present during the examination and coordinate the 
conduct of examination including confirmation of invigilators and other resources. 

 TAs are allocated to help the Instructors with invigilation  only and should not replace 
them in any manner. However, the TAs should be given full authority for effective 
invigilation. 

 The invigilators must keep the mobile phones in 'Silent Mode' during the conduct of 
the examination. 

 Letter grades must be submit ted within 96 hours after the day of Examination III.  The 
grades of a course with no Examination III , including project course s, seminars, 
thesis, etc, must be submitted with 96 hours from date of Examination III  for that 
semester. The grades of a half -semester course must be submitted within 96 hours 
after the date of final evaluation of that course. 

 Students must be given an opportunity to see their graded answer scripts of all 
examinations  before submission of the grades.  Please  also see the advisory on  
“Continuous evaluat ion and timely feedback” .

 Graded answer scripts of the examinations  must be retained by the Instructor for at 
least six months. In case of short -term visiting Instructors, the answer scripts must be 
kept with Discipline coordinator or Dean of Academic Affairs. 

 The grades cannot be changed once submitted and processed. Any grade change 
request shall require approval of the Chairman, Senate. Such a request must be 
submitted on the prescribed format with necessary details of the grading p rocedure 
and by highlighting the proposed changes. 
 
 
For Students   
 Be seated in the exam room at least 5 minutes before the start of exam 
 Ensure you are not carrying any material which may be counted under unfair means. 

 Punishment of using unfair means c an go up to termination of programme from the 
Institute. Even being a suspect of using unfair means can lead to severe 
repercussions. 

 Carrying mobile phones , smart watches  or any other electronic communication 
devices  to the exam room  is strictly prohibit ed. Preferably leave them in your hostel 
room.

 In case you see anybody using unfair means, please report the matter, quietly, to the 
Instructor or the Dean, Academic Affairs after the exam .  
Academi c Affairs Advisory 14 (Version 3 .0, December 2022 ) Page 1  
 
For Academic Office  
 
 Prepare the rooms for examination one day before the start of exams .

 Arrange to provide the required support (Roll List, Answer Scripts, water, 
refreshments, etc.) during the exam .
 Keep track whether letter grades are received w ithin 96 hours of the exam and send 
reminders wherever necessary . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Academi c Affairs Advisory 14 (Version 3 .0, December 2022 ) Page 2  Academic Affairs Advisory (Version 2.0, July 2016)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
Peer  Assisted Learning  (PAL)  Programme   
 
Peer  Assisted Learning (PAL)  programme  is an academic support scheme  for the 
undergraduate  students launched by IIT Gandhinagar in  October 2012. This programme  is designed 
on th e philosophy that peer group of students play an extremely influential role in determining their 
learning behavior. Students are known to actively seek advice from their peer group as they share 
the same generational perspective. The PAL programme  at IIT Gandhinagar initiated with a  specific 
aim to assist  those first year students who face difficulties in adapting to English as the medium of 
instruction in their  coursework. T hese students are identified by counselors during one-on-one 
interaction sessions  that are  held with the incoming batch of students during their first month  on 
campus. The senior students who serve as peer educ ators are selected by a faculty in-charge of the 
PAL programme  by inviting applications and conducting pers onal interviews in August every year.  
 
In a model PAL session , a senior student (second or a third year) assists two first year 
students by sharing  his/her knowled ge and experience that helps  them adapt to the n ew learning 
environment. The first year  students and the ir peer educators meet for four hours every week  for 
PAL sessions , usually in the evenings. The peer educators are compensated for their service 
through Earn While You Learn  (EWYL)  scheme  at IIT Gandhinagar. The PAL sessions begin in 
September every year and continue through Sem I and Sem II. During this period, t he faculty in-
charge meets with peer educators periodically and keeps sharing righteous practices on mentoring 
and interpersonal communication to ena ble them address needs of students more effectively .  
 
The platform facilitated by PAL programme  not only results in learning outside the 
classrooms, it also encourages discussions regarding academic and any other concerns in an 
informal peer environment . By seeking guidance from their peers, the students become more aware 
of the resources available on campus and experience a gradual transition to the institute’s culture. 
This results in an increased self -confidence among the students, which helps them on  several fronts.  
 
It was realized that some  students can be further  benefit ed from learning in a  peer group, if 
there are additional sessions dedicated to a specific  course  in which they can resolve their doubts . In 
this view,  an alternative  peer group led activity , named Academic Help Sessions (AHS), was 
conceptualized and init iated in Au gust 2015. These help  sessions  are designed to provide a tutorial -
like platform to stu dents where they ca n discuss technical details and problem solving sk ills (for an 
ident ified course ) with a small group of peer tutors everyday after dinn er (9 pm -11 pm) . These Academic Affairs Advisory (Version 2.0, July 2016)  Page 2 
 sessions  are primarily aimed to help the  first and second year students who are facing challenges in 
specific courses.  The instructor s of the specific course s are also informed about sessions  being run 
and they are invited to participate and share  their feedback.  The sessions  are coordinated by a 
faculty in-charge who: (i) identifies the specific course , (ii) selects tutors from the senior students, 
and (iii) periodically discuss the progress with the tutors.  This group of peer tutors  is also supported 
through the EWYL scheme.  
 
           In acknowledgment of the increasing student -led academic activities, a student coordinator 
will be selected  every year  (from 2016 onwards, as a member of Student Academic Council)  to help 
the faculty in -charges in ensuring regular conduct of the sessions, identifying competent tutors, and 
establishing a mutual coordination among the  tutors of various peer group led sessio ns.  
 
It is promising to note that the involvement of peers is greatly helping  us in reaching out to 
students more effectively and it is gradually shaping as a valuable resource for the first and second 
year students.  Further, in addition to the recipie nts, the student s serving as peer -educator s are also 
benefiting  immensely in the process of executing the ir responsibilities . The peer -educators have a 
rewarding and satisfying experience as they explore themselves while serving the community.  We 
are hopeful  that t his support scheme of involving peer educators will make  seminal positive impacts 
in the lives of students.   
 
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 2 9 (Version 1.0, November 2021)                                                     Page 1 of 3 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
EXPECTATION FROM HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCES FACULTY  
AT IIT GANDHINAGAR  
(As approved by the BoG in its 29th meeting held on 20 August 2020) 
  
 
Introduction  
The Humanities and Social Sciences (HSS) program is one of the central pillars of 
IITGN's academic agenda. Over the years, HSS has emerged as a truly interdisciplinary 
enterprise that promotes new epistemological paradigms in the Institute. The 
advancement of this enterprise and the achievement of its full potential requires focused 
efforts. The HSS has tremendous potential to evolve further and cohere with the other 
disciplines and institutional goals. This document is meant to guide the faculty in this 
process and further embed HSS into the aspirations of the Institute.   
 
The advancement of HSS necessitates adopting cross -disciplinary interaction and 
collaboration. The current composition of HSS with expertise in various domains is 
very conducive to its further progress. This opportunity is to be exploited to enhance 
the scholarship, impact, and social outreach of HSS in the Institute and beyond.   
  
A primary objective of the HSS program is to provide the IITGN  student the 
intellectual tools to understand, analyze, and critique their social, cultural, and 
political contexts of new knowledge systems and frameworks. This would ensure 
their personal growth and professional impact. This is no ordinary task when the vast 
majority (currently 95 percent) of IITGN students are in the engineering and science 
disciplines and have little or no exposure to the humanities or social sciences 
disciplines. This opens up a unique opportunity for HSS discipline to directly 
contribute to students' intellectual demand across disciplines.  
 
To ensure the comprehensive and rounded educational experience, the Institute has 
implemented several program innovations. The most import ant of these is the 
inclusion of several mandatory liberal arts courses in the academic curriculum. Nearly 
a fifth of the course work of undergraduate students is in HSS. The objective of this 
curricular requirement is to train students in critical thinkin g and analysis, social 
responsibility, and in the techniques of effective communication, both oral and written. 
Importantly, the incorporation of the liberal arts courses in the engineering and 
sciences curricula is to instill in our students an appreciati on of the complex social 
forces that inform the development of solutions to the grand challenges of our times.  
 
IITGN celebrates interdisciplinarity, and its HSS discipline is multidisciplinary and 
eclectic. While HSS faculty members may be unlikely to fin d many colleagues in their 
own specializations at IITGN, they may discover stimulating opportunities for 
interdisciplinary and collaborative scholarship and teaching with other HSS faculty 
and with colleagues in engineering and science that are often unavailable at 
traditional university programs.   
  
Faculty Roles and Responsibilities  
Faculty performance at IITGN is assessed according to the following criteria: 
teaching (30% weight), research (50% weight), and service (20%). Performance 
expectations in  each category are summarized below:  
  Faculty Affairs Advisory 2 9 (Version 1.0, November 2021)                                                     Page 2 of 3 
 Teaching:  The HSS faculty are expected to be enthusiastic about developing and 
teaching undergraduate courses contextualized for needs  of students  in the 
engineering and science disciplines. They should strive to deve lop courses with 
broad appeal and seek to make them relevant and salient to engineering students by 
helping them draw curricular connections with their life situations . In their teaching 
strategies, the HSS faculty are called upon to introduce inspiring courses and 
pedagogical techniques to motivate the Institute's unique and diverse student body. 
Innovative teaching strategies can include but are not limited to infusing  course 
content with creative and real -world examples, adopting experiential learning 
techniques, and introducing comparative approaches that draw on connections 
between the disciplines. HSS faculty are also encouraged to develop pedagogical 
partnerships t hat cross disciplinary boundaries and that promote new ways of 
thinking and learning.  
  
The following are some of the criteria considered in the evaluation of faculty 
teaching: quality of teaching (e.g., student feedback), range and type of courses 
taught,  innovations in pedagogical methods, number of students taught, mentoring of 
students at different levels, etc.  
  
Research:  IITGN expects its HSS faculty to pursue their primary research interests 
in any domain and specialization they desire and evolve as eminent scholars. The 
research leading to the scholarship of national and international reputation is 
imperative. IITGN also expects HSS faculty to be excited and enthusiastic about the 
multidisciplinary scholarship.  
  
Considering the faculty composition a t IITGN, research collaborations with 
colleagues in diverse areas provide a unique opportunity for the pursuit of 
excellence. The Institute recommends that HSS faculty take advantage of the 
intellectual diversity available on the campus and pursue research  collaboration 
opportunities with colleagues across disciplines. Engaging engineering 
undergraduate students in their research is one strategy by which HSS faculty can 
extend the disciplinary boundaries of their scholarship.  
  
HSS faculty are more likely t o succeed at IITGN if they are actively pursuing 
research funding, either individually or in partnerships with other scholars, both 
within and outside the institution. IITGN has a generous policy of providing support to 
its faculty who wish to invite visit ing scholars to the campus, organize conferences or 
travel to academic meetings in other locations. Faculty are encouraged to take 
advantage of these opportunities.  
  
Faculty research evaluation considers scholarly publications, sponsored research 
funding,  student research guidance, and the success of their Ph.D. graduates.  
  
Service:  Strong and effective faculty involvement and leadership in the management 
of the Institute is a defining characteristic of IITGN. All faculty members are expected 
to participa te in various committees and administrative roles enthusiastically and to 
volunteer to take up new responsibilities when these would advance the Institute's 
mission. Unlike many traditional universities, IITGN expects its faculty not to see 
"service" as a burden, but as an opportunity to build their leadership and bring a 
sense of fulfillment to their work.  
  Faculty Affairs Advisory 2 9 (Version 1.0, November 2021)                                                     Page 3 of 3 
 They are expected to lead or contribute to extracurricular programs and to participate 
generally in the intellectual and cultural life of the campus. Such service not only 
benefits the entire campus community but also provides faculty the opportunity to 
build their leadership skills, expand their network, and interact with the student body. 
In so doing, they also deepen their connection to the IITGN fam ily.  
  
Service is evaluated based on, but not limited to, the effectiveness and impact of the 
service engagement, and the strength of peer recommendations and evaluation.  
 
 Student A ffairs Advisory 1 1 (March 2020)     Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
STUDENT AFFAIRS  
 
NORMS FOR IIT GANDHINAGAR GRAM FELLOWSHIP  
 
(As approved by the BoG in its 21st meeting held on 17 March 2017)  
 
Rural India remains the backbone of India’s economy and heritage. It is often repres ented by 
“modern” urban India as backward and uneducated. It is observed that many of the students in India 
are rarely exposed to rural life, economy, practices and ethos, despite call by policy makers, since 
independence. IIT Gandhinagar aspires to addres s this concern by exposing its students to rural 
India. IIT Gandhinagar Gram Fellowship aims to encourage students to immerse themselves in the 
experience of what -it-is-like to live in a village. During the fellowship stay, the students would 
engage with t he community to understand their concerns, welfare, values and beyond. This 
fellowship is expected to be a learning experience rather than a “solution” finding/seeking project to 
be completed. This fellowship would help the fellows to experience the life o f common people who 
may not have access to sufficient resources. It would also be an opportunity for the fellows to think 
beyond technological interventions to address the concerns of the community.  
 
The students would also get a chance to understand preva iling socio, political, economic, cultural 
and humanitarian factors in the community. The students should be ready to volunteer to offer social 
service to the community during the fellowship. The students are encouraged to earn their livelihood 
by working for the community. The fellows should stay with the members of the community and be 
non-judgmental about their way of life. On their return, the fellows may translate their experiences 
into possibilities of interventions which could address the concerns of  the community.  
 
Guidelines  
 
 Fellows must commit to spend three to eight weeks during the winter (December) or summer 
break (May – July) either alone or in a group of not more than three.   
 The students are expected to identify the village of their engageme nt well in advance.   
 Students are encouraged to work and earn their livelihood during their stay in the village.  
 
Eligibility  and Selection  
 
In order to apply for IIT Gandhinagar Gram Fellowships, applicant must be regular student of IITGN 
and must be at l east 18 years old. It is applicable to the students of all programmes. The students of 
M.Tech and Ph.D programme availing this fellowship will be granted Academic Leave to undergo 
this fellowship. All complete applications will be scrutinized by the Senate  Scholarships and Prize 
Committee  (SSPC) . Shortlisted applicants will be invited for an interview by the committee to make 
the final selection. The evaluation of the applications would be based on the statement  of purpose 
and the performance during intervi ew, if applicable. The graduating seniors can also avail this 
fellowship within two months of completing their graduation requirements.  
 
Expenses  
 
The fellows are expected to travel by no n-AC train/bus coach (no air travel allowed). The Institute 
will reim burse return fare and nominal living expenses to the students. Students are encouraged to 
earn their living in the village and meet their expenses. If any fellows would like to undertake rural 
development projects on their return, an amount up to Rs. 25 ,000/- per fellow will be available. To 
avail the same, the fellows must submit a proposal to Student Affairs office and Dean , Student 
Affairs would approve the project based on its merit.  
 
The Application  
 
An applicant must submit statement of purpose (SoP) delineating the motivation for the fellowship. 
Upon return the recipient agrees to submit a report describing experiences and analyzing objectives 
achieved; contribute to the fellowship website; share their experiences with others; and be available 
to make  a presentation to the IITGN community. The applicant is expected to maintain a diary/ blog 
during the fellowship period; up to two students with best -kept diaries/ blogs will receive a prize of 
Rs. 5,000/ - and a certificate of merit.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 1 2 (Version 1.0, July 2012 ) Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR TRAVEL EXPENSES REIMBURSEMENT FOR FACULTY 
JOINING THE INSTITUTE  
 
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its  3rd meeting held on 7th January 2011)  
 
The Institute currently reimburses relocation expens es to faculty for joining the Institute limited 
to Rs.  50,000/ - for relocation from within India, and limited to Rs.  1,00,000/ - for relocation from 
abroad.  Visiting Faculty being invited from abroad are being reimbursed only travel expenses 
limited to Rs.  1,00,000/ - (for one round trip).  
 
In view of the experience gained till date, the following relocation norms are proposed:  
 
1) Faculty joining the Institute from another Central Government (including UGC) Funded  
University/Institute/Organization: Reimbursem ent of relocation expenses as per 
Government of India norms for TA on transfer in public interest including the composite 
transfer grant equal to one month’s basic pay (Band Pay plus Academic Grade Pay), 
without limit on the amount.  
 
2) Faculty joining the In stitute from within India:  Reimbursement of relocation expenses, 
as per Government of India norms for TA on transfer in public interest (excluding the 
composite transfer grant), subject to a maximum of Rs.1,00,000/ - . 
 
3) Faculty joining the Institute from o utside India: Reimbursement of expenses for travel of 
family (air travel by economy class) and cost of transportation of personal effects from 
residence abroad to residence in Ahmedabad, subject to a maximum of Rs.2,00,000/ -. 
 
4) Visiting Faculty: Total amoun t of reimbursement of travel expenses at the time of joining 
and on completion of tenure (from residence in Ahmedabad to the actual place of 
relocation) to be limited to Rs.50,000/ - for to and fro relocation within India, and to 
Rs.1,00,000/ - for that from  abroad.  
 
5) Wherever considered appropriate in the interest of the Institute, the Standing Committee 
may approve a higher amount on a case by case basis and the same shall be reported 
to the Board.  
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar  
Campus Safety  
 
Standard Operating  Procedure  on Lab and Fire Safety  
                             
                       
Introduction  
With the increasing dependency on electrical gadgets and digital facilities, and chemical usage, it is 
imperative that all precautions are put in place for safe use of equipment hazardous materials and 
chemicals and safety of users. IITGN the premier institute of Nation is fully equipped with its 
modern labs, class rooms and other necessary facilities for use by students, staff and faculty. It 
also implies that complexity of all electric systems  and chemicals  must be carefully studied and 
used to avoid any accident. This document lay down certain aspects of handling of hazardous 
chemicals, fire prevention and fire fighting in case required.  
                                                                                                                                  
Fire Prevention  
IITGN campus in spread over in approx 400 acres o f  land , out of which constructed area in its 
present state is approx. 118 acres which includes Academic ,Hostel and Housing blocks. The 
buildings are compact from functional view point at the same time area is sufficiently open to 
prevent fire from spreadi ng.  
Best way to prevent fire is to understand the probable causes of fire and take adequate 
precautions to prevent fire.  
 
Probable Causes of Fire  
 Electrical  
o Over l oading of wires and at p ower sockets.  
o Mishandling of e lectrical equipment and machinery.  
o Loose connection in multi o utlets plugs.  
o Electrical Heater.  
o Loose wiring.  
o Improper Insulation at junction points.  
o Improper connection with extension cords  
 
 Human Error  
o Storage of waste and combustible material near probable source of fire.  
o Mishandling  of Electrical appliances and machines.  
o Mishandling of flammable chemicals and solvents  
o Unattended Hot Plate.  
o Poor housekeeping.  
o Throwing away lighted cigarettes.  
 
 Lab Accidents  
o Heating of oxidizing m aterials by gas flame or oil bath. 
o Use of water reactive material in presence of water . 
o Exposure to air of pyrophoric materials . 
o Storage of Incompatible chemicals.  
o Inadequate Ventilation while experimenting with gases.  
o Mixing of wrong chemical solutions while doing experiments in lab.  
o Storage of gas cylinder in confined space/poor ventilation.  
o Un-controlled heat produced by chemical reaction.  o Bunsen burners can pose fire hazards . 
o Improper ground ing of equipment and machinery . 
o Ignorance of MSDS (Material safety data sheet), instructions on safety.  
 
 Natural Calamity : Lightening etc.  
 
Preventive Measures  
 General  
o Watch against any loose electric connections, short circuiting, sparks from fuse/sockets 
etc. and report i mmediately to concerned staff.            
o Ensure all lights are switched off & plugs are pulled out  while leaving the room / lab by end 
of the day .   
o Unattended burning is  strictly prohibited . 
o Wear  lab coats, safety g lasses  and shoes before entering labs with chemicals and heavy 
machinery . 
o Wear g loves while handling chemicals and corrosive materials.  
o Read safety descriptions (MSDS) about the chemicals and solvents thoroughly before 
opening the containers.       
o Open and handle all chemicals only inside fume hoods.  
o Observe f ire precautions in cafeteria, canteen &kitchen.   
o Maintain clean and c lutter free campus.   
o Ensure r egular inspection and testing of all electrical appliances  and wiring . 
o Do not leave flame unattained.    
o Follow “no smoking” rules in applicable areas.  
o Ensure proper ventilation and illumination.  
o Be aware of a ll entry / exit doors to be fire resistant.  
o Follow all norms as laid down by local fire office.  
o Display important contact details / tele nos in each block at suitable location.  
 
 Preventive measures for Chemical lab: Attached as  Appendix ‘A’.  
 Preventive measures for Elect rical lab: Attached as  Appendix ‘B’.  
 Preventive measures for handling heavy machines in Civil/ Mechanical / Electrical lab: 
Attached as  Appendix ‘C’.  
 Preventive measures for fire: Attached as  Appendix ‘D’.  
 How to use fire extinguisher: Attached as Appendix “E”.  
 Important contact numbers : Attached as  Appendix “F”. 
 
Action t o be Taken in Case of Outbreak of Fire  
 
Famous saying “Man proposes and God disposes” cannot be ignored. If at all unfortunate accident 
takes place, IITGN community must be well prepared to stop the fire immediately. For this, each 
person must be aware of the actions to be taken as part of colle ctive effort. Awareness capsules, 
training and regular practice will contribute immensely towards preventing / stopping fire outbreak.  
 
People  
It is important to identify the response  force expected to be involved in firefighting  and need to be 
trained accordingly . These can be classified as under:  
 First Responders  – Security and house - keeping staff along with the researcher who works in the 
lab regularly in near vicinity are expected to react first and need to be trained on act ions to be 
taken and use of firefighting equipment .  
 
Actions by First Responders –The expected s equence  of action would be as under:  
 Moment fire is noticed;  draw attention of all persons around by shouting  “FIRE,  FIRE,  FIRE” . 
 Whistle to be blown by s ecurity staff onshort spurts  to draw attention of persons in near 
vicinity . 
 By this time t he fire alarm system (h otter etc)will get activated and location of fire will be 
indicated . It is possible that first indication of fire comes from alarm system befor e anybody 
comes to know.  
 Security staff or persons from support team (in case security staff is not available at site at 
that moment) to immediately take out fire extinguisher from nearest location and try to 
extinguish fire.  
 In case of electrical fire, immediately switch off the power from nearest mains and use CO2 
extinguisher only and not to spray water.  
 
Support Team  – All staff and faculty are expected to support firefighting efforts.  
Following actions are expected to be taken:  
 Faculty/students/staf f present near the area of fire must (MUST) maintain calm, evacuate 
persons/belongings etc in case stuck inside and ensure there is no stampede like situation.  
 Call Gandhinagar fire station and call fire tender, if required.    
 Switch off main switch of the affected room / block as applicable in case of electric fire.  
 Evacuate persons who may need medical attention on priority.  
 Help entry of firefighting staff and fire tender movement up to location of fire.  
 Help in de -crowding the area  and guide them to pre assigned area, if required.  
 Inform police in case situation demand for crowd management.  
 
Training  
Training is the most important part of firefighting operation. In case the responder is not trained to 
operate the firefighting equipment, he can’t be named as responder.  Training can be classified as 
under:  
(a) Training to handle the equipment (awareness Capsule)  
(b) Mock up drills to remain abreast with the training.  
(c) Handling of chemicals and lab safety.  
 
Awareness Capsule:  Capsule should be conducted atleast  once in four months so that all the 
security and housekeeping staff undergo this training at least once a year. Capsule  should include 
following topics:  
(a) Likely cause of fire  
(b) Preventive measures  
(c) Training on equipment handling and its maintenance.  
 
Mock up drill: Mock up exercise is important to check the efficacy of training imparted and 
sensitize the community and their participation as part of support team. Mock up drill should be 
done once in six months with dummy controlled fire preferably in open area .  
  
Lab Safety : Lab safety training should be conducted once a year to make awareness among 
researchers about safe laboratory practices and handling of corrosive, toxic and pyrophoric 
chemicals.   
 
STOP  DROP  ROLL   
 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar  
CAMPUS SAFETY  
Important Phone Numbers  
 Fire  
 Dial - 101 
 Fire and emergency Services -Gandhinagar  
 Phone No. (079) 23222100, 23222742  
 Campus Security (7567935473)  
 Safety Supervisor (9879560096)  
 Police  
 Dial - 100 
 Police Control Room, Gandhinagar: (079) 23210914, 23210108  
 Chiloda Police Station: (079) 23273600, 23273737  
 Ambulance  
 Dial - 108 
 Junior Citizen Council, Gandhinagar:  
o (079) 23242023, 23240182 ; +91 94268 33344  
 General Hospital ( Civil ), Gandhinagar :  (079) 23221931 / 32 / 33  
 To ca ll IIT Medical Center: 09276836488  
 Snake issues  
 Snake Lovers Club, Ahmedabad  
o 9909918569, 9998077701, 9033440304  
o Mr. Pankaj (Village Palaj):  9099325553  
 Sundarvan Snake Park , Ahmedabad : (079) 2692 1838/ 2692  3148      
 Snake catchers  
o Madan Singh         : 94279 52623  
o Jagrubhai              : 94270 10188  
o Sandip                  : 99255 99039  
o Amit                     : 98982 08238  
o Arvind                  : 98988 28609  
o Dhaval                  : 94082 03447  
o Kamlesh               : 99247 48209  
o Kaushal bhai        : 9998077701  
o Alternate persons : 76000 09845/97250 03122  
 
General Administration Advisory 23 (Version 1.0, May 2020)                                                     Page 1 of 1 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
GUIDELINES ON ANNUAL PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT REPORTS FOR STAFF  
Any top -class Institution must have a  robust system  for performance  evaluation . Unlike faculty or 
student evaluation, which usually includes several measurable parameters, such parameters are 
limited in the case of staff performance evaluation. The evaluation of staff performance is more 
subtle and depends heavily on the reporting o fficer to make an objective assessment of the 
performance of the staff member. The Institute expects its reporting officers to exhibit highest 
level of objectivity, consistency  and integrity in evaluating annual performance of the staff 
reporting to them. Some specific expectations in this regard are listed below:  
 
1. The reporting /reviewing authorities should rate the staff against a large populati on of 
his/her peers currently working in the Institute . Inconsistent staff evaluations across the 
Institute, undermine the processes of staff awards and promotions . 
2. Comments must  be given within the framework of governance philosophy and ethos at  
IITGN, and not be coloured by the experience of the report ing of ficer in their prior jobs . 
For ins tance, IITGN lays great emphasis on (a) integrity and loyalty to the Institute, (b) 
team work and inter -personal skills, and (c) hard work. Special attention must be given to 
evaluate the staff on these parameters.  
3. Undue “protectionism”  of a staff at a personal or a department level is very detrimental to 
the entire purpose  of performance appraisal. Such “protectionism”  not only vitiates the 
staff assessment process but also reflects poorly on the Reporting Officer. Some 
examples of such undesirable “ protectionism ” are:  
a. This person is working under me , and hence , I must protect him.  
b. I must take care of my people and reward them with outstanding/ very good 
performance appraisal ( so they will remain loyal to me !), regardless of the 
performance.  
c. If I evaluate him/ her correctly, he may lo se the job or promotion ( It is hard to get 
a job these days !). Hence, I will personally reprimand him and tr y to improve him 
but I must not hurt his future prospects by writing a weak appraisal . 
4. Mixing of different issues must be avoided. For instance, an otherwise competent staff 
may have an abrasive  personality. His/ her evaluation should clearly highlight both 
aspects, viz. , competence  on one side and abrasive personality on the other side.  
5. Although formal performance appraisal is a year -end process,  the Reporting Officer s are 
expected to review performance  at regular intervals and take corrective steps by way of 
oral advice /counselling, written communication , etc.  
6. The Reviewing Officer shou ld clearly express his/ her agreement or disagreement with  the 
remarks made by the Reporting Officer . This is particularly so with regard to adverse  
remarks  or with outstanding grade. He/ she may also  make his/ her own  remarks and 
points, not mentioned by the Reporting Officer, particularly, when the report  is vague and 
cryptic. Th e Reviewing Officer is in fact expected to personally find out  about the work and 
conduct of the  appraisee before making his/ her own judgment . 
7. The entire assessment report will be reviewed by the Director (as the Accepting Authority) 
before deciding  the final grading for an employee.  He may choose to seek additional 360-
degree view before assigning the grade.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 1 1 (Version 2.0, January 2021)                                                             Page 1 of 4 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 EXCELLENCE AWARDS FOR FACULTY  
(The scheme was approved  the Board  of Governors  in its second meeting held on 19th September 
2010 , the guidelines adopted by Senate in its eight meeting held on 10th September 2011  and 
revised by the Board of Governors in its 30th meeting held on 17 December 2020 ) 
 
 
In addition to “Chaired” Positions for experienced faculty members and “Research 
Fellows hips” for young faculty members with promise of outstanding research, it is proposed 
to set up excellence awards for faculty members for outstanding contributions in each of the 
categories of teaching, research, institution building, and outreach (service to the profession, 
e.g., through committee work, consulting and continuing education). For this purpose, the 
Institute proposes to create four separate, “Outstanding Contribution” awards to be given at 
the end of each academic year to the deserving faculty ; Teachers’ Day celebration on 
September 5 every year may be a very appropriate occasion for honouring the faculty. The 
recognition of their efforts will foster increased motivation among the faculty members to 
pursue and implement ideas in the fields of t heir passion.  
 
These awards will carry a certificate of felicitation and a financial reward of Rs 1,00,000/ -. In 
addition, a sum of Rs 1,00,000/- will be contributed to the faculty member’s Professional 
Development Fund to allow the faculty member to grow fur ther and explore novel ideas.  
 
In the proposed structure of the award, a faculty member can only win an award in any one of 
the four categories in one academic year. He / she may however be considered for any 
number of categories. In addition, once a faculty member has won the award in a particular 
category, he/she will not be eligible for the award in the same category for the next three 
years.  
 
For these awards to be effective means of encouraging excellence, the selection process 
must be transparent and above board. The precise mechanism for setting the criteria and 
evaluation of the award will be decided by the Academic Senate at IITGN in consultation with 
the faculty and periodically revised in view of experience gained. It is understood that these 
awards will be based on actua l contributions carried out at IITGN, and admittedly, lasting 
contributions require a longer time scale to measure, at least two years. Hence, the Senate 
may choose to start only with a few awards in the beginning, say Excellence in Teaching 
Award and the Excellence in Research Award.  
 
Norms for Excellence in Teaching  Award  
 
 Excellence in Teaching Award will be open to all the regular faculty members who have 
completed at least two years of teaching at IIT Gandhinagar and have contributed to 
the teaching o f at least 3 different courses at IIT Gandhinagar. In the initial phase, 
because of the small number of f aculty members likely to fulfill  this criterion, this could 
be restricted to 2 courses.  
 A weighted average of the overall course evaluation by the stud ents feed -back will be 
considered as cut -off parameters for a faculty member to become eligible for 
consideration for Excellence in Teaching Award.  Suggested cut -off criterion at present 
is: a weighted average of the overall course evaluation 3.20 (minimu m) on the scale of 
4.00. For this purpose, the course evaluation data of only those courses will be 
considered for which feedback has been received from at least 40% of the students 
registered.  
 The Visiting / Adjunct Professors will be kept outside the amb it of this award.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 1 1 (Version 2.0, January 2021)                                                             Page 2 of 4 
  A course Instructor nominated for consideration of Excellence in Teaching Award 
should have taught at least one Institute level compulsory course (with minimum class 
strength 75) or a department level compulsory course (with minimum clas s strength 20) 
in the span of 2 years period under consideration.  
 For the time being there will be only one award under individual category.  
 The award will be based on actual contributions of the faculty member for his teaching 
work carried out at IITGN, and admittedly, lasting contributions require a longer time 
scale to measure, at least two years.  
 The Central Award Committee may consider the following norms for evaluation of  
Excellence in Teaching:  
 Sustained record of excellence in teaching, supported by records of evaluations of 
courses by students, as well as feedbacks from the past and the present students 
whenever available, be collected, evaluated and recognized;  
 Ability to present complex information with precision and clarity with due emphasis 
on the fundamentals;  
 Ability to inspire, stimulate and touch upon a responsive chord in the students on the 
subject matter and also to encourage creative thinking in them through constructive 
criticism;  
 Ability to generate students’ interest in the subject by excellent teaching 
methodologies and continued use of state of the art educational technology for 
teaching;    
 Ability to respond spontaneously to inquisitive questions and queries from the 
students and thus enhancing the students’ confidence in underst anding major 
underlying concepts / fundamentals / issues;  
 Demonstrated zeal for, and innovation in, teaching;  
 Demonstrated caring for learning by students;  
 Ability to become role model for the students in their pursuit of knowledge and 
personality development.   
 It is desirable that the principle components for assessment of excellence in teaching  
include:  
 Unqualified acclaim a faculty member receives from t he student community;  
 Meticulous planning of the course material, its efficient delivery and its inspiring 
impact on the minds of students;  
 The current and the past teaching records of the faculty member.  
Excellence in Teaching Award shall be conferred pre ferably on Teacher’s Day, 
(September 5 ) every year. Each conferment should be accompanied by a citation and 
cash award as approved by the Central Award Committee from time to time. The format of 
the citation has to be left flexible enough so that it could be in accordance with the nature of 
achievement and the personality concerned and the text of the citation should highlight the 
specific nature of the outstanding contributions in pursuit of Excellence in Teaching by the 
awardees.  
   
Norms for Excellence i n Research Award   
  
 The award will be based on actual contributions / research work carried out at IITGN, 
and admittedly, lasting contributions require a longer time scale to measure at least two 
years.  
 The Visiting / Adjunct Professors will be kept outside the ambit of this award.  
 The Central Award Committee (CAC) may consider the following norms for evaluation 
of Excellence in Research Award.  
 
 Consistent publication record in peer -reviewed journals  
 Meritorious citations /awards  Faculty Affairs Advisory 1 1 (Version 2.0, January 2021)                                                             Page 3 of 4 
  Significant research support generated through sponsored/consultancy projects  
 Other publications ( Monographs, Review articles, books and book chapters, 
editorials etc. ) 
 Patents, Software and tools developed etc.  
 Peer -reviewed research presentations ( invited lectures, panel mem berships etc. ) 
 Significant impact of research on the research community in the area of research  
 Research work for social relevance  
 Significant impact of research on societal benefits / relevance  
Recognition  
 Peer reviewed journal positions such as Editor/Associate Editor etc.  
 Membership of national and international committees for research grant reviews  
 Membership of Advisory and Organizational Committees for national and 
international symposia, workshops and conferences etc.  
 Prestigious Research Awards  
 
 Excellence in Research Award shall be confirmed preferably on the Foundation day of 
the Institute, every year. Each conferment should be accompanied by a citation and 
Cash award as approved from time to time. The format of the  citation has to be left 
flexible enough so that it could be in accordance with the nature of achievement and 
the personality concerned and the text of the citation should highlight the specific nature 
of the outstanding contributions in pursuit excellence  in Research.  
 
Norms for Excellence in Institution Building Award   
 
 Award for Excellence in Institution Building will be open to all the regular faculty 
members who have completed at least two year of stay at IIT Gandhinagar.  
 The award will be based on ac tual contributions made by the faculty member at IITGN, 
and admittedly, lasting contributions require a longer time scale to measure, at least 
two years.  
 The Visiting / Adjunct Professors will be kept outside the ambit of this award.  
 The Central Award Committee may consider the following norms for evaluation of 
excellence in Institution Building : 
 Consistent Contribution in establishing / acquiring common / central facilities for the 
Institute  
 Consistent Contribution as a functionary in  capacity building in academic and non -
academic activities of the Institute.  
 Consistent Contribution in governing and strengthening the students’ activities on 
campus of the Institute.  
 Consistent contribution in administrative and/or socio -economic activi ties of the 
Institute in improving efficiency and effectiveness of various stake holders of the 
Institute.  
 Consistent contribution in strengthening the existing infrastructure and also 
managing efficient use of the infrastructure of the Institute.  
 Signif icant research support generated through sponsored / consultancy projects  
 
 Excellence in Institution Building Award shall be confirmed preferably on the 
Foundation day of the Institute, every year. Each conferment should be accompanied 
by a citation and C ash award as approved from time to time. The format of the citation 
has to be left flexible enough so that it could be in accordance with the nature of 
achievement and the personality concerned and the text of the citation should highlight 
the specific nat ure of the outstanding contributions in pursuit of excellence in Institution 
Building.  
 
 
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 1 1 (Version 2.0, January 2021)                                                             Page 4 of 4 
 Norms for Excellence in Outreach Award   
 
 Award for Excellence in Outreach will be open to all the regular faculty members of the 
Institute who have completed at least two year of stay at IIT Gandhinagar.  
 The award will be based on actual contributions of the faculty member concerned while 
his/her stay at IIT Gandhinagar, and admittedly, lasting contributions require a longer 
time scale to measure, at least two years.  
 The Visiting / Adjunct Professors will be kept outside the ambit of this award.  
 The Central Award Committee (CAC) may consider the following norms for evaluation 
of excellence in Outreach:  
 Consistent contribution towards outreaching nationally and internat ionally and 
connecting IIT Gandhinagar to the societal needs.   
 Consistent contribution in bringing highlights to IIT Gandhinagar in pursuing its goal 
of sustainable and all -inclusive growth, including community outreach programmes 
in the capacity as a fac ulty member of the Institute.  
 Consistent contribution in governing and strengthening the outreach programme of 
the Institute.   
 Consistent contribution in connecting the student body of the Institute with the local 
societal needs such as contributions to local schools and community at large.  
 Significant support generated for outreach programmes through fund generation 
and creation of infrastructure etc. during the period under review.  
 Significant contributions through refresher courses such as Continuing Education 
Programme (CEP) etc and/or workshops / Seminars / Symposiums etc.  
 Excellence in Outreach Award shall be conferred preferably on the Foundation day of 
the Institute, every year. Each conferment should be accompanied by a citation and 
Cash award a s approved from time to time. The format of the citation has to be left 
flexible enough so that it could be in accordance with the nature of achievement and 
the personality concerned and the text of the citation should highlight the specific nature 
of the outstanding contributions in pursuit excellence in Research.  
 The following provisions apply to each of the above awards:  
 A faculty member can only win an excellence award in any one of the four categories 
(viz. Teaching, Research, Institution Building and Outreach ) in an academic year.  He / 
she may however, be considered for any number of categories.  
 Once a faculty member has won an award in a particular category, he/she will not be 
eligible for the award in the same category for the next three years. How ever, his/her 
candidature can be considered for the remaining category of awards.  General Administration Advisory 2 9 (Version 1.0, June  2023 )                                          Page 1 of 11 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
APPLICABILITY OF PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972 AT IIT GANDHINAGAR  
(As approved by the BoG in its 3 7th meeting held on 13 May 2023) 
 
 
The Board  of Governors of the Institute in its 37th meeting held on 13 May 2023 
endorsed the adopt ion of Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 for the employees of IIT 
Gandhinagar as per the Ministry of Education Memorandum No. 15-2/2022 -TC dated 
16 December 2022  attached herewith as Annexure -I.  
 
  General Administration Advisory 2 9 (Version 1.0, June  2023 )                                          Page 2 of 11  
Annexure -I 
 
General Administration Advisory 2 9 (Version 1.0, June  2023 )                                          Page 3 of 11  
General Administration Advisory 2 9 (Version 1.0, June  2023 )                                          Page 4 of 11  
General Administration Advisory 2 9 (Version 1.0, June  2023 )                                          Page 5 of 11  
General Administration Advisory 2 9 (Version 1.0, June  2023 )                                          Page 6 of 11  
General Administration Advisory 2 9 (Version 1.0, June  2023 )                                          Page 7 of 11  
General Administration Advisory 2 9 (Version 1.0, June  2023 )                                          Page 8 of 11  
General Administration Advisory 2 9 (Version 1.0, June  2023 )                                          Page 9 of 11  
General Administration Advisory 2 9 (Version 1.0, June  2023 )                                          Page 10 of 11  
General Administration Advisory 2 9 (Version 1.0, June  2023 )                                          Page 11 of 11  
 
General Administration Advisory 07 (Version 3.0, January 20 21) Page 1 of 4 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
LUMP SUM INCENTIVE FOR ACQUIRING HIGHER QUALIFICATIONS BY 
NON -FACULTY EMPLOYEES  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 8th meeting held on 03 December 2012  and  
In its 30th held on 17 December 2020 ) 
 
 
The Board in its 8th meeting held on 03 December 2012 approved one time lump 
sum incentive for acquiring higher qualifications by non -faculty employees. The 
scheme was based on the norms of Govt. of India with some modifications because 
of special situation of  the non -faculty staff profile of the Institute.  
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 30th meeting held on 17 December 
2020 approved  that the Institute may follow the norms and rates as provided in the 
DoPT Office Memorandum No.  1/5/2017 -Estt ( Pay-I) dated 15 March 2019 
(Annexure -1).  
 
The Board in addition approved  a provision of granting up to a maximum of 10 
working days per calendar year as special casual leave for registration, practicals, 
special classes and examinations, etc. in pursuance  of such programmes . 
 General Administration Advisory 07 (Version 3.0, January 20 21) Page 2 of 4 
 Annexure -1 
 
 General Administration Advisory 07 (Version 3.0, January 20 21) Page 3 of 4 
 
 General Administration Advisory 07 (Version 3.0, January 20 21) Page 4 of 4 
 
 
 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS (FAQs) ON PROCUREMENT AT IITGN  
 
1. Who should be my first point of contact to start the purchase procedure?  
 If the purchase is from Institute (Main) Fund, you may contact your 
Discipline Coordinator regarding availability of budget  and in case of 
purchase is from Project & Consultancy/ R&D fund, you may contact R&D 
section.  Once the availability of funds is ensured, you may fill the PPRF 
(indent ), get it approved and submit to MM Section for procuring the 
item.  
 
2. Is there a manual wh erein the rules and guidelines for purchase procedure 
 are mentioned?  
 Yes, these are available at the Institute’s Internal Web Site (IWS) under 
the heading ‘Stores & Purchase Manual’.  
  
3. Do I need a tender for procuring any item?  
 Purchase of any item upto R s.50,000/ - can be done directly.  
 Purchase between Rs.50,000/ - to Rs.1,50,000/ -  can be done through 
Local Purchase Committee (LPC).  
 Purchase costing more than Rs.1.50 lakhs need to be procured by 
initiating tender process.  
 
4. Is it possible for me to buy an item and then claim the money back?  
 It is discouraged to buy any item from own money. However , whenever 
necessary, small purchase s may be done with prior concurrence of the 
financial authority . 
  
5. How and by when should advance for procurement of an item be  settled?  
 The advance or part payment of any item is to be settled immediately 
after receipt/installation but not later than 30 days.  
  
6. What is “Two -bid system” in a tendering process?  
 Two -bid system, is a tendering process where the bidder s are asked to 
submit their bids in two parts i.e,  technical (pertaining to eligibility and 
technical specification s) and financial bids separately.  Financial bids of 
only those bidders are opened who qualify in technical bid evaluation.  
  
7. Within what time frame can I place a repeat order?  
 The norms/conditions of Repeat Order as mentioned at Clause 6.4 of S&P 
Manual are appended below:  
• The repeat order can be made with no change in the rates, specifications 
as well as terms & conditions of supply.  
• The repeat order shall be placed within 120 days’ time  from the date of 
the quotations.  
• After ensuring that there is no significant reduction (more than 10%) in 
the cost of the item(s).  
• No repeat order will be placed if buy -back is involved in the repeat 
purchase.  
• Any amended order shall not be considered for repeat orde r. 
 8. When does a procurement file go to external and or internal pre-audit?  
 Any file involving procurement of cost between Rs.10.00 Lakhs to 25.00 
Lakh s is audited by Internal Audit  before PO/ payment . 
 All files related to major procurement (more than Rs.25.00 Lakh s) is 
audited by External Auditor.  
  
9. Who and when is the purchase committee formed?  
 The purchase committee is formed after the tender is floated and before 
the opening of bids.  
 MM section req uests the indenter to suggest the names of purchase 
committee, however, the committee is formed only after approval of the 
Competent Financial Authority (CFA).  
 While suggesting the names of committee members, it may be ensured 
that all member s in the commi ttee are not from same discipline. Also, 
inclu sion of persons having close relation  may  be avoided.  
 
10. Is procurement of an item through “single tender” and “Proprietary route” 
 the same?  
 Procurement of a ‘Proprietary Item’ is reason/circumstances for which 
“Single Tender” Enquiry can be resorted to.  Detailed norms of “Single 
Tender Enquiry” are appended below.  
 Procurement from a single source may be resorted to in the following 
circumstances:  
(i) It is in the knowledge of the user department that only a particu lar 
firm is the manufacturer of the required goods.  
(ii) Property Certificate issued by the vendor is not valid - propriety is 
to be established by the indent er. 
(iii) In a case of emergency, the required goods are necessarily to be 
purchased from a particular source  and the reason for such 
decision is to be recorded and approval of competent authority 
obtained.  
(iv) For standardisation of machinery or spare parts to be compatible 
to the existing sets of equipment (on the advice of a competent 
technical expert and approve d by the competent authority), the 
required item is to be purchased only from a selected firm.  
  
11. Who maintains the asset register for entering the details post procurement of 
 an item?  
 On receipt of the item the end user is to enter its details in their 
respective asset register and process the bill for payment after making 
annotation of such entry. Subsequently, MM section also enters the asset 
in the Central Asset R egister maintain ed by it.  
 
12. Can the tender process be cancelled at any stage?  
 Tender proce ss cannot be cancelled as a routine manner.  In case a tender 
is required to be cancelled in unavoidable circumstances, it should be 
proposed with detailed justification for approval of the CFA.  
 After approval of the CFA, MM section  to issue notification o f cancellation 
of the tender.  
 13. Should the entire committee members be present for technical opening and 
 financial opening of the tender?  
 Ideally technical and financial bids are to be opened in the presence of 
entire committee. However, if it is not possi ble for all the members to be 
present, it is to be ensured that at least two member s are present at the 
time of opening of technical and financial bids.  
 
14. Can any terms of the tender be changed on ce the tender bids are received?  
 No, after opening of bids, no changes can be done in any clause of the 
tender document.  
 
15. How do I introduce changes in the technical specification once the technical 
 bid is live?  
 In rare circumstances, if the need arises to do any modification in the 
tender document, the same can b e done with approval of the competent 
authority  and announcing in the public .  
 However, in case the tender document is modified then the last date of 
bid receiving has to be extended to give opportunity to possible bidder to 
bid for the subject tender.  
  
16. Can price negotiations be made with the lowest vendor?  
 Price negotiation, if required, is to be done ONLY with L -1 bidder. Prior 
concurrence of the CFA is to be obtained before entering into any price 
negotiation.  
 
17. Can PO once issued, be amended?  
 In rare c ircumstances PO can be amended with approval of the CFA.  
 
18. Can I modify the warranty period of any item during technical or financial 
 evaluation after floating the tender?  
 In normal circumstances period of warranty can not be modif ied once 
tender is closed . 
 
19. Actions required from end user once PO is issued:  
 Intimate MM section as soon as the item is received.  
 In case the item is not received within the stipulated time frame as 
mentioned in the PO, the end user should intimate MM section to initiate 
appropriate action.   
 Direct correspondence by indenter with vendor will not be encouraged. 
In case, if it is necessary, all correspondence should be done keeping in 
loop with M&M office.  
 On receipt of item and invoice, and after its installation payment voucher 
is to be initiated by end user within a week time.  
 
20. Can I waive the late delivery penalty to any bidder?  
  No, end user can not waive late delivery penalty . If in the knowledge of 
end user, the delay is justified, he/she may recommend for waiver of late 
delivery penalty for approval of the CFA.   
 
  PROCUREMENT PROCESS  
 
Note: Before starting any procurement process, the indenter must 
check if he/she has budget/funds to b uy the item/equipment.  
 
Sr. 
No. Process / Step  Action By & 
Expected Time  
  
  Action By  Time  (Days ) 
1 Indent / PPRF received  Indenter  00 
2 Preparation of Draft Tender Document and forwarding it to 
the Indenter for confirmation  MM Section  07 
3 Tender Documents to be returned by the Indenter after 
Review  Indenter  05 
4 Tender document to be uploaded on institute’s website on 
receiving  confirmation from the indenter  MM Section  02 
5 Bid(s) receiving time / period  +  
In case need arises to extend the date due to non -receipt of 
minimum three bids  MM Section  28 + 30  
6 Technical bid(s) opening  Committee  04 
7 Submission period for Technical report by the indenter  Committee  10 
8 Notification to be uploaded for financial bid(s) opening  MM Section  05 
9 Financial bid(s) opening  Committee  02 
10 Preparation of Financial report(s) after opening Financial 
bid(s)  Committee  05 
11 Planning of negotiation meeting with L -1 bidder, conduct 
negotiation and get the revised quotation from the Bidder  Committee  15 
12 Preparation of Final Financial Evaluation Report (after 
negotiation)  Committee  05 
13 Preparation of Sanction sheet  MM Section  05 
14 Internal audit (If procurement value is more than Rs. 10 
Lakh)  Internal Audit  03 
15 External audit (If procurement value is more than Rs. 25 
Lakh)  External 
Auditor  03 
16 Obtaining Approval of the competent financial authority  MM Section  02 
17 Issuing period of P.O. on receiving approval  MM Section  01 
 Total :  102  + 30  
 
 Research and Development Advisory 03 (Version 2.0, January 2013 ) Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
HIGH -LEVEL SUMMER INDUSTRY ACADEMIA INTERACTIONS 
PROGRAMME  
 
As approved by the Director on 8th February 2012 and r atified by the Board of Governors in its 
6th meeting held on 10th March 2012, a  High Level Summer Industry Academia Interaction 
Progra mme for faculty members has been  established by IIT Gandhinagar with the following 
objectives:  
 
1. To bring to participating faculty an immediate and practical knowledge of the practices of 
industry in In dia, thus enhancing the relevance of teaching and research at IITGN.  
 
2. To bring some of IITGN’s substantial intellectual resources to bear on problems of 
immediate importance to the cooperating industrial/ R&D organizations, and thus 
contribute directly to the industrial and economic development of India.  
 
As per the programme, a faculty member spends a period ranging from four to twelve weeks 
during the summer vacation as an employee of an industrial or R&D organization, applying/ 
specialized knowledge and  skills to contribute to the host organization. During this period, the 
faculty member takes personal leave/vacation as due from the Institute, and is compensated by 
the host organization. As a norm, the Institute will usually recommend a monthly remunerat ion 
approximately equal to 10 percent of the person’s annual salary at IITGN.  In addition, the host 
organization will also be expected  to pay for round trip transportation from Ahmedabad and 
provide accommodation at their location.  
 
The organization take s considerable risk in bringing an outsider into its set -up, especially at a 
high level. The faculty member must cooperate in maintaining confidentiality of the 
organization’s products and processes, even if it means not publishing or disclosing the result s 
of his/her own work at the organization. However, most organizations permit discussion of the 
summer work to some degree at least. The work done with an organization during the summer 
may serve directly as course content, or form the basis of later scien tific work by the concerned 
faculty members or their students at IITGN.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Academic Affairs Advisory 5 9 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 1 of 8 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
Norms for e -Masters Programme in Energy Policy and Regulation  
 (As approved by the Senate  in its 61st meeting held on 15th November 2022 ) 
 
Overall Structure of the Programme:  
[Approx. 10 full course equivalents of 4 credits, 1 credit equivalent to 10 hrs.]  
[Min. 400 hrs of engagement required for e -Master’s degree ] 
S. 
No Course Title  Total 
Engagement 
(hrs.)  
1 Power Sector Reforms & Regulations - Fundamentals, Institutions & 
Evolution  40 
2 Electricity Regulations - Legal & Regulatory Frameworks  40 
3 Power System Operations & Electricity Market  40 
4 Economics of Power Sector - Tariff Philosophy, Principles & Regulations  40 
5 Renewable Energy Market, Regulations & Sustainable Energy Future  40 
6 Tariff  Regulations - Generation, Transmission, Distribution & Retail 
Business  40 
7 Smart Grid, Ancillary Services  & Grid Flexibility  40 
8 Demand Side Management  and Energy Efficiency  40 
9 Environmental Regulations, Carbon Pricing & Green Hydrogen  40 
10 Distribution Reforms, Good Governance & Effective Regulat ors 40 
11 Regulatory Capstone Project -1   40 
12 Regulatory Capstone Project -2 40 
13 Writing/Leadership  40 
 Total  520 
 
Break -up of courses:  
Course Type  List of Courses from the Programme Structure  Total 
engagement 
(hrs.)  
Foundation  1. Power Sector Reforms & Regulations - 
Fundamentals, Institutions & Evolution  
2. Electricity Regulations - Legal & Regulatory 
Frameworks  
3. Power System Operations & Electricity Market  
4. Economics of Power Sector - Tariff Philosophy, 
Principles & Regulations   160 
Core  1. Renewable Energy Market, Regulations & 
Sustainable Energy Future  
2. Tariff Regulations - Generation, Transmission, 
Distribution & Retail Business  
3. Smart Grid, Ancillary Services  & Grid Flexibility  
4. Demand Side Management and Energy Efficiency  
5. Environmental Regulations, Carbon Pricing & 
Green Hydrogen  
6. Distribution Reforms, Good Governance & 
Effective Regulations  240 Academic Affairs Advisory 5 9 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 2 of 8 
 Regulatory 
Capstone Project 1  Suitable Topics relevant with the Program will be 
decided with mutual consultation.  40 
Regulatory 
Capstone Project 2 Suitable Topics relevant with the Program will be 
decided with mutual consultation.  40 
Writing/Leadership  To be added  40 
Total engagement 
(hrs.)    520 
 
Programme Course Contents:  
 
1. Power Sector Reforms & Regulations - Fundamentals, Institutions & Evolution [40 
Hrs] 
Course objectives:  
The module helps participants to get an overview of the Indian power sector and its 
evolution through pre & post Reforms. The module provides participants an 
understanding of the fundamentals Principles of Regulations, Institutions and functioning 
of Regul atory bodies.  
Course contents   
Scope, Significance, and need of Regulations in India, Overview of Indian Power Sector, 
Generation (Different Fuel), Renewable Energy (all types) Transmission, Distribution, 
Retail Market, System Operator, Energy Exchange, E volution of Indian power sector pre -
independence, Post -independence, and Reforms and Restructuring of Power Sector, 
Growth of Renewable Energy, Wind, Solar, Hybrid RE, Waste to Energy and other types 
of RE, Regulatory Authorities in the power sector, its p ower and function, Structure of 
Regulatory bodies, appointment Process, required skills, selection process, terms, 
Attributes of Regulators, Regulatory Reforms and Good Governance issues Case Study 
& Group Exercise - Privatization of Distribution in Orissa – Lessons Learnt  
Mode of conduct:  Interactive sessions with academic and Industry experts, there will be 
continuous assessment through multiple quizzes, problem solving exercises, viva voce & 
presentation on the assigned case study.  
Textbooks/References  
1.  Ignacio J Perez Arriago  - Regulation of the Power Sector  
2. Deo P, Sushanta K Chatterjee, Shrikant Modak - Renewable Energy in India: 
Economics & Market Dynamics  
3. Alok Kumar and Sushanta K Chaterjee , “Electricity Sector in India - Policy & 
Regulations  
 
2. Electricity Regulations - Legal & Regulatory Framework [40 Hrs]  
 
Course objectives :  
The module helps participants understand the legal, policies, statutory & regulatory 
frameworks of electricity regulation in India. The participants will also understand the 
process of framing different types of regulations and their significance which are  
necessary for sustainable development of the power & energy sector.  
 Academic Affairs Advisory 5 9 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 3 of 8 
 Course contents : 
Electricity Act 2003, All Rules notified under the EA2003, National Electricity Policy, 
National Tariff Policy, Rural Electrification Policy, Competitive Guidelines for  procurement 
of electricity Tariff based competitive bidding guidelines of Transmission services, Mega 
Power Project Policy, Hydro Policy, Guidelines for taking Renovation and Modernisation 
of Power Plants, Deen Dayal Gramin Vidyutikaran Yojna - DDUJY, Elec tricity (Rights of 
Consumers) Rule, National Policies on Market Development, Solar Policy, Brief on CPC, 
IPC & Company Law relating to Electricity Regulations, Framework and important 
Regulations like Conduct of Business Regulations, Fees & Fines Regulatio n, Staff 
Recruitment Regulation, etc, Process of framing Regulation, Multi -year Tariff 
Regulations, Licensing, Power Purchase Agreement, Redressal of Grievances, type of 
authorities to address consumer’s complaints - 2 Case Studies  
Mode of conduct:  Interact ive sessions with academic and industry experts. Important 
case laws of Indian power sector. There will be a continuous assessment based on 
quizzes, and presentations on an assigned case study on the constraints in present 
legal/regulatory framework in India in the  or small project on challenges in the energy 
transitions in India.  
Textbooks/References  
1. Kumar Alok and Sushanta K Chaterjee - Electricity Sector in India -Policy and 
Regulations  
2. Dubash N K and D Narsimimha, The Practice and Politics of Regulat ions- Regulatory 
Governance in Indian Electricity  
3. Asquer A - Regulations of Infrastructure and Utilities, Public Policy and management 
issues  
3. Power System Operations & Electricity Market [40 Hrs]  
 
Course objectives :  
The module helps students understand the concepts of AC circuits, basic structure of 
power system and its operation, electricity market & power exchanges in India.  It will also 
help them to understand the role & functioning of system operators (national/r egional/state 
load dispatches) in the energy transition in India.  
 
Course contents : 
Fundamental of AC circuits – balanced/unbalanced 3 -phase system, understanding of 
complex power, active power, reactive power and power factor; Basic structure of power 
systems - generation, transmission and distribution, fundamentals on economic dispatch,  
power flow problems and power system stability; Introduction to deregulation and 
restructuring of power system - Open access & competitive power market, Inter -State and 
Intra-State Open Access (Short Term/ Medium Term Open Access) regulations, role of 
system operator/NLDC/RLDC/SLDC and operation guidelines, grid operation and 
congestion management, Security constrained economic dispatch (SCED), Available 
Transmission Capability (ATC) determination, Transmission pricing, Open Access 
charges and requirement of National Tariff Policy, Power Exchange (PX) structure and 
energy trading process, Day -ahead market (DAM) and real -time market (RTM), operation 
and related Regulations and Energy Accounting - Procedure & Methodology, Demand 
forecasting, Deviation settleme nt mechanism (DSM), Group exercises on generation Academic Affairs Advisory 5 9 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 4 of 8 
 scheduling, availability, and deviation settlement.   
Mode of conduct:  Interactive sessions with academic and industry experts. There will be 
continuous assessment of participants through quizzes, problem -solving exercises, 
presentations on the assigned case study or projects on power system operations and grid 
management in best performing States in India and abroad.  
Textbooks/References  
1. Mohammad Shahidehpour and M. Alomoush, Restructured Electrical Power S ystems: 
Operation, Trading, and Volatility, CRC Press, 2001  
2. Fried I Denny & David Dismukes  - Power System Operations & Electricity Market  
3. Barrie Murray - Power Market & Economics  
 
4. Economics of Power Sector - Tariff Philosophy, Principles & Regulations [40 Hrs] 
 
Course objectives :  
The module covers fundamental principles of regulatory economics and helps participants 
understand different approaches to the Price Regulations. The module also helps 
participants understand the economic rationale for regulation and an understanding of tariff 
setting.  
  
Course contents   
Fundamental Principles of Economics in the Power Sector, Cost of Producing Electricity, 
Fixed and Variable Cost, Average & Marginal Cost, Generation, Transmission, 
Distribution, and Supply Cost, O ther Costs of the Power Sector, Economies of Scale - 
Monopoly to Competitions, The behavior of the Consumer and Demand Curve, The 
behavior of Supplier and Supply Curve, Law of Supply & Demand, Market Structure, 
Theory of Market and different forms of Market s, The practice of Tariff Setting in India, 
Tariff Regulations - Cost Plus Vs Price/Revenue Cap & Hybrid Tariff, Determination of 
Annual Revenue Requirement (ARR), Multi -Year Tariff Regulations & its Analysis, Case 
Studies: Approval of Retail Tariff by Regu latory Authorities .  
Mode of conduct:  Interactive sessions with academic and Industry experts. There will be 
continuous assessment of participants based on quizzes, problem -solving exercises, viva 
voce, presentation on the assigned case study or project on tariff cases in India and 
Abroad.  
Textbooks/References  
1. Christopher Decker – Modern Economic Regulation - An introduction to Theory and 
Practice  
2. Nancy L. Rose - Economic Regulation and its Reform  
3. Ignacio J Perez Arriago  - Regulation of the Power Sector  
5. Renewable Energy Market, Regulations & Sustainable Energy Future [40 Hrs]  
Course objectives :  
The module provides an overview of the Renewable Energy (RE) Policies, Regulations 
and RE Market in India. It shall help participants understand Central and State  regulations 
on setting of renewable energy tariff and other technical & commercial aspects.  
 Academic Affairs Advisory 5 9 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 5 of 8 
 Course contents   
Legal Provisions & Statutory Policies, Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) & State wise 
position, Present status of RE & Global commitments, RE Tariff and Competitive bidding, 
Step by Step Method of Tariff Setting of Wind, Solar & Small Hydro, Net & Gross Metering 
Regulations for Solar Roof Top, CERC Tariff Regulation of RE, Connectivity of RE & 
Transmission System, Emerging Role of System Operator, Renewable Energy Certificate 
(REC) Mechanism, The framework of the Market for RE, Standalone System and 
Micro grid, Green Energy Corridor - Institutional Arrangements & Implementation Strategy, 
International Solar Alliance, Net Zero, Potential use of RE for EV charging, Policy and 
Regulatory Framework  for EV Charging infrastructure. Case Study -& Group Exercise:  1 . 
Solar Suryashakti Kisan Yojna (SKY) 2. Approval of RPPA at Regulator Level  
Mode of conduct:  Interactive sessions with academic and Industry experts. There will be 
continuous assessment of participants based on quizzes, problem -solving exercises, 
Projects  on international experiences on EV, Green Hydrogen, Carbon Trading, etc.  
Textbooks/References  
1. Kumar Alok & Sushanta K Chaterjee - Electricity Sector in India -Policy and 
Regulations  
2. Deo P, Sushanta K Chatterjee, Shrikant Modak - Renewable Energy in India: 
Economics & Market Dynamics  
6. Tariff Regulations - Generation, Transmission, Distribution & Retail Business [40 
Hrs] 
Course objectives :  
The module helps participants gain in -depth knowledge to understand the existing 
Regulatory framework including Multi Yea r Tariff (MYT) Regulations in generation, 
transmission, distribution, and retail supply tariff. It helps partici[pants  to examine & 
analyze the Aggregate Revenue Requirement (ARR) & Tariff Proposals of different 
stakeholders and work out tariff for them.   
 
Course contents   
Generation - Statutory Provisions and Multi Year Tariff (MYT) Regulations, Fuel Supply 
Agreement, Power Purchase Agreement (PPA), Determination of Generation Tariff – U/S 
62- Tariff Regulations, Step by Step Procedure for ARR & Tariff Se tting for Thermal Plant, 
Availability Based Tariff Regulation, Case Study & Group Exercise on Tariff Setting of Coal 
Plant in India and its Regulatory approval, Transmission -Statutory Provisions and 
Regulations, Competitive Bidding for Transmission - Policy  & Guidelines, Determination of 
Transmission Tariff – U/S 62 - & as per Tariff Regulations for Transmission, Determination 
of SLDC (State Load Dispatch Centre) Tariff – U/S 62 - & as per Tariff Regulations for 
SLDC, Step by Step Procedure for ARR & Tariff Se tting for Transmission Tariff, Case 
Study & Group Exercise for Approval of Transmission & SLDC Tariff Distribution & Supply -
Statutory Provisions and Regulations, Power Procurement Guidelines & State ERC 
Regulations, Competitive Bidding for Procurement of P ower -Policy & Guidelines, 
Determination of Distribution Tariff – U/S 62 - Tariff Regulations for Distribution, 
Determination of Retail Tariff – U/S 62 - Tariff Regulations for Retail Supply, Step by Step 
Procedure for ARR & Tariff Setting for Distribution &  Retail Tariff, Case Study & Group 
Exercise for Approval of Distribution & Retail Tariff  
Mode of conduct:  Interactive sessions with academic and Industry experts. There will be 
continuous assessment of participants based on quizzes, problem -solving exerci ses, Academic Affairs Advisory 5 9 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 6 of 8 
 Projects on preparing appropriate business models in the Competition in the retail 
businesses in India and abroad and viva voce.  
Textbooks/References  
1. Christopher Decker – Modern Economic Regulation - An introduction to Theory and 
Practice  
2. Ignacio J Perez Arriago  - Regulation of the Power Sector  
3. CERC /SERC MYT Tariff Regulations  
7. Smart Grid, Ancillary Services & Grid Flexibility [40 Hrs]  
 
Course objectives :  
The module covers smart grid technologies and the concept of flexibility in all activities of 
the power system covering generation (Conventional & Renewable energy) transmission, 
distribution, & at consumer’s end. It helps participants to understand the pressing need of 
ancillary services & related regulations.  
Course contents : 
The ar chitecture of Smart Grid & Technologies, Advanced Metering Infrastructure, 
Elements & Technologies of Smart Grid, Distributed Energy Resources, Energy 
Management, Design of Smart grid and Practical Smart Grid case study, international 
experience of smart g rid, Micro/Mini Grid, Computational tools for energy data analytics . 
Basic Concepts & Fundamentals of the requirement of Flexibility in Renewable Energy 
integration. Regulations and other Standards to deal with the Flexibility, Ancillary Service 
Regulation s, Indian Electricity Grid Code, Intra -State ABT Mechanism & Deviation 
Settlement Mechanism (DSM), Flexibility in Thermal Generation, Flexibility in the Indian 
power system, Flexibility in System operation, Demand Side Flexibility. Role of Energy 
Storage i n grid management.   
Mode of conduct:  Interactive sessions with academic and industry experts. There will be 
continuous assessment of participants through assignments, viva voce and presentations 
on the assigned case study or assigned projects on smart gri d/Metering.  
Textbooks/References  
1. Jahangir Hossain Apel Mahmud, Renewable Energy Integration , Springer  
2. Ignacio J Perez - Arriga, Regulation of the power sector  
3. Subir Sen , Rajesh Kumar, D P Kothari,  Smart Grid : Fundamentals & Applications   
8. Demand Side Management & Energy Efficiency [40 Hrs]  
 
Course objectives : 
The module shall cover the concept of Demand Side Management in a Distribution 
company as well as the need of self -regulation from the consumer side to manage its 
demand through applic ation of new technology, energy efficiency, smart meters, and 
demand response program. The module helps participants understand the implementation 
and technologies involved to integrate and optimize distributed energy resources (DER) 
to achieve an efficien t and reliable grid management.  
Course contents : 
Concept of Demand Side Management, Energy Efficiency & Demand Response (DR) 
program, Significance and need of Demand Side Management in India, Need of Demand Academic Affairs Advisory 5 9 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 7 of 8 
 Response and Energy efficiency to conserve energ y, DR in India and International 
experience of USA/UK Planning &  Implementation Strategies & Monitoring, Assessment 
of the market, program selection, Cost -benefit analysis, Various types of Schemes & 
Energy Efficiency equipment, All types of Load curves a nd shapes, Demand Response, 
Demand Forecasting.  The framework of Regulations in Demand Side Management, 
governing laws & framework and important Regulations, Bureau of Energy Efficiency 
(BEE) and their functions Baseline data definition, Energy Efficiency  and types of energy 
saving devices, Monitoring and Reporting for Demand Side Management Program. 
Targets, Guidelines of programs, Cost -Effectiveness Assessment of programs and 
Monitoring, Reporting, Plans and programs. Demand side management cell in Distr ibution 
companies. Power Quality Monitoring & Management.  
Mode of conduct:  Interactive sessions with academic and industry experts. There will be 
continuous assessment of participants through quizzes, problem solving exercises, 
presentation on the assigned  case study.  
Textbooks/References  
1. C. W. Gellings , John H. Chamberlin , Demand Side Management - Concepts & 
Methods   
2. SERC Regulations on Energy Efficiency & Demand Side Management  
9. Environmental Regulations, Carbon Pricing & Green Hydrogen [40 Hrs]  
 
Course objectives : 
This module describes a set of regulations and statutory laws that address the effects of 
emission of greenhouse gasses from various activities in the power sector on the  
environment.   In addition, it will cover the use of different strategies to regulate carbon 
emission by carbon trading, carbon pricing, creation of market, and the need for a balanced 
regulation.  Participants will also understand the importance of green hydrogen and r elated 
policy frameworks in India.  
Course contents : 
Statutory Provisions for Carbon Reductions, Energy Conservation Act, Policy & Regulatory 
Framework, Concept of Carbon Pricing, Effective Mechanism for Carbon Pricing, 
Strengths Explicit Carbon Pricing, Ca rbon Pricing for Sustainable Development, Role of 
Effective Carbon Pricing as a good climate Policy, Carbon Trading & Market, Status of 
Carbon Pricing - International Studies & Indian State of Affairs, Vision for Green Hydrogen 
Economy in India, Green Hydro gen Status, Drivers, and Challenges, Types of Hydrogen 
and its cost, Important Elements for making Effective Policy for Green Hydrogen Policy, 
Priorities and National goals to support green hydrogen,  Production Processes and Cost 
& Benefits Analysis.  
Mode  of conduct:  Interactive sessions with academic and industry experts. Quizzes, 
problem -solving exercises, Continuous assessment of participants through case studies 
on carbon trading, carbon market etc.& presentations/viva voce.  
Textbooks/References  
1. Leela  krishnan, Environmental Law in India   
2. John Smith, The Possibility of a Hydrogen Economy: Renewable Energy Future  
 
 
 Academic Affairs Advisory 5 9 (Version 1.0, November  2022 )                         Page 8 of 8 
  
10. Distribution Reforms, Good Governance & Effective Regulators [40 Hrs]  
 
Course objectives :  
The module aims to conceptualize learnings from best practices from national & 
international experience. Participants shall  understand the need of effective regulations, 
good governance,  role of regulators &, their attributes.  
 
Course contents : 
Financial  health of Distribution Utilities - Present Status & future trends, Distribution losses 
& Aggregate Technical Commercial Losses, Policy Initiatives and trend of loss reductions 
in India, Regulatory Role & Response, Tariff Rationalization and Introduction of  incentives 
and penalties in Tariff structure, Regulation of Public -Private Distribution Utilities & 
introduction of Good Governance, Energy Accounting,  Metering & Energy Audit, Accurate 
Load Forecasting, Use of digital Technology - AI & ML, Real -Time asse t management, and 
effective power Procurement, Analysis of Effective Regulations in India, Attributes of 
Effective Regulator. Case Study: Best Practices of top 5 Public & Private Distribution 
Companies in India  
Mode of conduct:  Interactive sessions with academic and industry experts. There will be 
continuous assessment of participants through multiple quizzes, case studies, viva voce 
and presentations on the projects on the best practices in distribution businesses in India 
and abroad.  
Textbooks/Reference s 
1. Scott Hempling,  Preside or Lead?  
2. Pratik Biswas & Sukanya Mondal , Indian Electricity Sector under Regulatory Regime   
 
11. Two Capstone Projects on Regulation in Power Sector, Electricity Market, 
Renewable Energy and Emerging Technologies [Long Engagement: 80  Hrs] 
 
Course objectives :  
The project course will expose the student to solving some small problems by applying 
the fundamentals covered in various courses. It may require data generation/data 
collection, modeling, analysis, and hypothesis validation.  
 
Course contents : 
Students will work on various regulatory, technology related topics and present at the 
semester's or module's end. They will meet faculty members separately during the 
semester for their project course. Students will also be encouraged to use some lab 
facilities during their visit to the IITGN campus.  
 
Mode of conduct:  The student should be connected with faculty members for regular 
progress of the project through multiple discussion session throughout the semester. They 
should present the progress and get evaluated during mid semester as well as end 
semester. In addition to the presentation, student should prepare a project report and 
submit the it before end semester evaluation.  
 
 General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 1 of 16 
 
  
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
IIT GANDHINAGAR  (RESIDENCE ALLOTMENT) RULES, 202 3 
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 38th meeting held on 05 September 2023)  
 
 
To streamline the process for allotment and other associated matters of residential 
accommodations at the Institute , the following policy named as “ IIT Gandhinagar 
(Residence Allotment) Rules, 2023” was approved by the Board in its 38th meeting 
held on 05 September 2023 . The Policy comes into force with immediate effect and 
supersede s all previous orders/ communications on the matter . 
 
1. Short title and commencement  
1.1 These rules shall be called as “IIT Gandhinagar  (Residence Allotment) 
Rules, 202 3”. 
1.2 The Director, Indian Institute of Technology  (IIT) Gandhinagar  with the 
approval of the Board may, from time to time, revise/ modify these rules 
which will be applicable from the date (s) from which the modification (s) 
is/are introduced by him /her or from the dates as may be specified  in the 
notification to this effect . 
1.3 These rules shall come into force from such  date as may be notified by t he 
Institute . 
2. Definitions  
For the purpose of IIT Gandhinagar  (Residence Allotment) Rules 202 3, the 
following terms shall mean as defined herein under.  
 “Allotment”  means the grant of a license to an employee of the Institute 
to occupy a house or a portion thereof, owned or leased by the Institute, 
for use as residen ce in accordance with the provisions of these rules.  
 “Allotment Year”  means the year of allotment  beginning on the f irst 
January or such other period as may be notified by the Institute.  
 “Allottee”  means the  person eligible and to whom residence is allotted 
under these rules.  
 “Academic Staff”  means the category of staff as specified  in the Clause 
16 (1)  (i) of Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar . 
 “Authorities”  mean the authorities  as defined by the Act and Statutes.  
 “Board”  means Board of Governors, Indian Institute of Technology  
Gandhinagar  
 “Director”  means Director,  Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar , 
who shall be the “Competent Authority” for the purpose of these rules.  
 “Emoluments”  means the emoluments as defined  in Fundamental Rule 
9(21)(a)(i)  and shall include stagnation increment, Special Pay, Deputation General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 2 of 16 
 
 (Duty) Allowance and Non-practising Allowance (for medical practitioners 
only) , wherever applicable.  
Explanation : In the case of an employee, who is under suspension, the 
emoluments drawn by him /her on the first day of allotment year in which 
he/she is placed under suspension or if he /she was placed under 
suspension on the first day of the allotment year, the emoluments drawn 
by him /her immediately before su spension shall be taken as emoluments.  
 “Employee”  means whole time/regular  and or any other  employee  of the 
Institute  including those staff members vi siting on deputation, FST terms  
who are eligible for residence on the campus in terms of these rules.  
 “Institute”  means Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar . 
 “Non -academic Staff”  means staff other than Academic Staff.  
 “Estate Officer”  means officer (s) assign ed the role as such by the 
Competent Authority of the Institute . 
 “Family”  means employee's spouse,  children, step -children, legally 
adopted children, parents, brothers and sisters , who ordinarily reside with 
the allottee .  
 “Licence Fee ” means the sum of money payable  by allottee normally on  
monthly basis as compensation for occupation of a residential 
accommodation allotted under these rules. It includes flat license fee -cum-
rent fixed by the Institute in respect of different type s of accommodation 
based on the living area including all the cost.  
Explanation: No House Rent Allowance (HRA) is admissible to the 
allottee occupying the residence provided by the Institute.  
 “Residence”  means any residence under the administrative control of the 
Institute.  
 “Seniority ” of an employee for the purpose of residential allotment which 
shall be determine d on the basis Pay Level, Pay, Service at the Institute 
etc. as per the rules provided in IIT Gandhinagar  (Residence Allotment) 
Rules 202 3. 
 “Subletting”  of a residence includes sharing of accommodation by an 
allottee with another person with or without payment of licence fee by such 
other person.  
Explanation : Any sharing of accommodation by an allottee with close 
relations shall not be deemed to be subletting. Intimation, however, to this 
effect shall be given in writing to the Institute . Further sharing  of 
accommodation for visit by casual visitors – relatives or friends, for a short 
duration shall not be considered subletting.  
 “Type of residence”  in relation to an employee means the type of 
residence to which he /she is eligible under these rules.  
3. Eligibility 
3.1 Institute residence shall be allotted on license only. Save as otherwise 
provided in these rules, the following categories of employees shall be 
eligible for allotment of Institute residence subject to availability.  General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 3 of 16 
 
  The Academic and Non -Academic staff of IIT Gandhinagar  appointed 
on regular basis against a permanent position.  
 Visiting /Emeritus /Chair Professors and Re -employed/Contractual 
faculty members.  
 Academic and Non -Academic Staff Members appointed on 
Deputatio n/Foreign Service Terms (FST).  
 Persons eligible under terms and conditions of an MOU with Institute.  
 Any other category of Academic and Non -Academic staff not covered 
above and subsequently approved by  Director.   
3.2 The eligibility shall end when the correspo nding condition ceases to be 
valid.  
3.3 If a person and his/her spouse are  both employees of the government or 
government organizations – within the municipal limits or within 8  km of 
radius from Institute, whichever is more , only one of them shall be eligibl e 
for the allotment of residence. If the person ch ooses to take the residence 
in Institute the spous e shall be required to provide a certificate that no 
residence is  allocated by the other organization . This, however, shall not 
apply where the husband and wife are residing separately, in pursuance of 
a valid order of judicial separation made by a Court of Law.  
Explanation: When both husband and wife are in the employment of 
Institute, they shall be eligible for a single residence which shall be of the 
highe r of the eligibility of husband and wife.  
3.4 When two persons in occupation of residences allotted to them 
individually, marry each other and the conditions of rule 3.3 become 
applicable, they will be required to surrender one of the residences  within 
one month from the date of marriage . 
3.5 A person who is having a period  of less than one year from the date of 
his/her superannuation as on the last date of application, shall not be 
eligible to apply for a residence if he/she is already holding a residence 
lower/equal to his/her eligibility.  
4. Inter-se seniority of employees for residential accommodation  
As per Statute 19  (2) of the First Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar , it is stipulated that 
“For determining the inter -se seniority of employees of different categories for 
specific purposes such as for the membership of authorities and bodies, 
residential accommodation etc ., the  Board may approve the norms and 
guidelines from time to time.”  
In view of the above provision, the inter -se seniority of employees , only for the 
purpose of Residential Accommodation, shall be determined as per the 
following.  
4.1 Seniority of an employee shall  be determined on the basis of the date from 
which the applicant  has been continuously eligible for the type of 
residence as per the pay level of the applicant in the Pay Matrix. An 
employee drawing higher pay level shall be senior to the employee of 
lower  pay level for a particular type of residence he/she is entitled for.  General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 4 of 16 
 
 4.2 In the same Pay Level, seniority shall be determined by the present Basic 
Pay on the first day of the allotment year. The employee in receipt of 
higher Basic Pay shall take precedence o ver the employee in receipt of 
Lower Basic Pay.  
4.3 Where the Pay Level and Basic Pay are equal, seniority will be determined 
by the length of service in the Institute i.e. an employee who joined the 
Institute on an earlier date  on regular post , shall be senio r than the 
employees who joins on a later date.  
4.4 Where the pay level, Basic Pay and length of service are all equal, 
seniority will be determined by date of birth. Employee senior in age i.e. 
having earliest date of birth will be determined to be senior.  
4.5 For any ambiguity that may arise in defining the seniority, the decision of   
Director shall be used to resolve the issue.  
5. Classification of residences and entitlement thereof  
Type  of 
Accommodation  Living Area  
(Sq. m per unit)  Entitlement  
Type - A 161.32  
(149.09 +12.23 
Helper Qtr.)  Pay Level 14 and above  
Type - B 106.60  Pay Level 10A,  11, 12, 13, and 13A  
Type - C 76.37  Pay Level 7,  8, 9, and 10  
Type - D 62.17  Pay level 4,  5, and 6  
Type - E 39.58  Pay level 1,  2, and 3  
Type - F 29.98  Married PG Students/ married post-docs  
NOTE : (1) The R egistrar of the Institute shall be entitled  for Type -A residence 
irrespective of the Pay Level and Basic Pay . (2) Chief Medical Officer, 
Operations Manager, Chief  Engineer of the Institute shall be entitled for at 
least Type -B residence even when the pay level is below the pay level for its 
entitlement.  
6. Allotment procedure  
The residences shall be allotted upon the recommendation of a Housing  
Allotment Committee ( HAC) of the Institu te constituted by Director normally for 
a period of two years. The composition of the committee  from amongst the 
employees of the Institute  shall be the following : 
1. Chairperson   A faculty member of appropriate rank   
2. Member 1                One faculty member  
3. Member  1      One staff member  
4. Member Secretary   Estate Office r 
 General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 5 of 16 
 
 Functions of HAC 
The Housing  Allotment Committee shall  
i. Follow the IIT Gandhinagar  (Residence Allotment) Rules . 
ii. Periodically float the available residences to eligible persons, take their 
choices and recommend the allocation.  
iii. Consider  any other matter related to the residence allotment and referred 
to by Director  and give  its recommendations to Director , whose decision 
shall be final and  binding.  
Application for Allotment  and Allotmen t of Residence  
 The engineer of Institute  authorized by Director will inspect each vacant 
residence and will arrange for necessary repairs and white washing etc ., if 
required. The  engineer  will also certify that the vacant residence is safe, 
livable and fit for occupation. No major work shall be carried out after the 
residence is allotted.  
 Announcement of vacant residence shall be made periodically  and 
applications shall be invited by HAC f or allotment of residence . The 
employees and others eligible persons seeking allotment of residence shall 
provide their choice s of vacant residence as per their eligibility in prescribed  
application form  (attached in Annexure -I). The a pplication, once made, may 
be withdrawn prior to allocation . Subsequent to allocation, the person shall 
deem  to have been allocated the residence . 
 The applications received by the prescribed date shall be scrutinized  by 
HAC to determine eligibility of the applicants and recommendations for 
allocation shall be presented to the competent authority for approval . 
Director  at his own discretio n, may keep certain residences out of 
allocation or may allocate the same out of the seniority . However, such 
discretion shall be exercised rarely and the reasoning for exercising such 
discretionary power shall be well documented on each case to case basis.  
 Save as otherwise provided in these rules, the residences shall be allotted 
by the Director  or his authorised representative/office  in accordance with 
the seniority lists. The senior -most applicant will be allocated the residence 
from amongst the vacant and available residences as per the choice. The 
process will be repeated for all the applican ts in the order of seniority as 
per their choice s exercised and availability  of the residence of the  choice.  
 On receipt of allotment order, the e state officer  shall hand over the key of 
the residence to the authorised allottee and the allottee shall return the key 
of the residence  to the estate officer  at the time of vacation of the 
residence.  
 The allottee, at the time of taking possession of the accommodation , shall 
verify  carefully all items, fittings and fixtures in the allotted accommodation 
and shall sign in the book of inventory kept for that purpose. He/she shall 
be responsible for damage except that which arises as a result of normal 
wear and tear. The cost of damage , if any, as determined by the estate 
officer  shall be payable by the allottee.  General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 6 of 16 
 
  A higher type of accommodation may  be allotted to an employee on 
his/her request as a purely temporary measure, in case all the employees 
entitled to that type o f accommodation have been provided with residence  
and no more applicants are there in the seniority list  subject to the 
condition that the employee (such allottee) shall vacate the residence at 
one month's notice as soon as the entitled employee asks for r esidential 
accommodation failing which the allotment may be cancelled.  
 No employee shall be compelled to accept a residence of a type lower 
than that to which he is entitled under these rules. However, Director may, 
on request from an employee, allot a res idence below the type to which he 
is otherwise entitled . 
 Director may cancel the existing allotment of an employee and allot an 
alternative residence of the same type or in emergent circumstances an 
alternative residence of the lower type, if the residence  in occupation of 
the employee is required to be vacated for some bonafide public purpose.  
 An employee under suspension shall be entitled to allotment of a 
residence of the entitled type. To determine entitlement of the suspended 
employee, his emoluments s hall be considered as defined in this 
document . 
 Save as otherwise provided in these rules an allottee desiring a change of 
residence within the entitled type shall be permitted only once in the entire 
service period. For the allocation, the same rules shal l apply in terms of 
seniority based application.  
 The allottee is a licensee under these rules and at no point of time can 
claim the tenancy right of the residence. The allottee shall not use the 
allotted residence for any purpose other than residential  purpose . 
Out of Turn Allotment  
Notwithstanding anything contained in these Rules, Director , on the 
recommendations of HAC or of the concerned authority , if needed,  may allot  
residence of entitled type or lower type on out of tu rn basis in the following 
cases. 
i. To a non -resident I ndian of exceptionally brilliant professional career who 
is appointed as a faculty member  at Institute . 
ii. To visiting faculty/Chair Professor  
iii. To persons joining Institute on  Deputation/Foreign Service  
iv. To an employee who returns from a  long leave or upon completion of 
deputation/foreign service, provided the employee had vacated and 
surrendered the residence allotted earlier when the employee proceeded 
to long leave/deputation/foreign service.  
v. To an employee whose spouse was in employme nt at Institute and 
ceases to be eligible for residence allotted to them due t o 
superannuation of the spouse.  
vi. To persons declared as belonging to essential services.  
vii. To single women employee (facing extreme hardship).  General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 7 of 16 
 
 viii. To an employee on following medical grounds in consultation with 
appropriate medical advice of the CMO or equivalent.  
a) major illness  such as cancer, pulmonary tuberculosis  etc. with risk to 
others.  
b) severe physical defect or deformity which causes undue interference 
with the normal functioning  of the bones, muscles and joints.  
c) heart ailments having symptoms of grade III and IV which include 
serious  disability;  
d) total absence of sight or visual acuity;  
e) orthopaedic deformity (with percentage of disability ≥ 40%) which 
causes difficult y in moving freely.  
ix. In the event of death of an allottee, a member of the allottee's  family 
maybe given out of turn allotment by Director subject to the following 
conditions:  
a) The deceased employee was residing in Institute residence at the 
time of his/her death;  
b) The family member (who does not own a residence within the 
municipal limits or within a radius of 8 km from the Institute, 
whichever is more  applicable ) is an  employee  of IIT Gandhinagar  or 
gets an employment at IIT Gandhinagar  within 12 months after the 
death of the allottee for which the family member makes an 
application within one month of the death of the allottee.  
c) All the dues outstanding in respect of the residence of the deceased 
allottee have been cleared.  
Explanation : The facility of out of turn allotment to the family 
member of the deceased allottee shall be available to only one of the 
family  members of the deceased allottee.  
7. License fee and other charges  
7.1 An employee of the Institute, who has been allotted house or a partment, 
shall be charged license fee at the rate approved by the Board including 
such other charges as may be decided by it from time to time. (Clause 7 
(3)(a) of Schedule ‘D’ the Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar ) 
7.2 In addition to the license fee, charges for w ater, electricity and any other 
service rendered shall be recovered from the employee at such rates as 
may be determined by the Board from time to time.  (Clause 7 (3)(b) of 
Schedule ‘D’ of the Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar ) 
7.3 The License fee payable by the allottee  for different type of residences  will 
be as per notification/instruction issued b y Institute from time to time with 
the approval of the Board.  
7.4 Where the allotment of residence or alternative residence has been 
accepted, the liability for licence f ee shall commence from the date of 
occupation or the 8th day of the date of the allotment letter, whichever is 
earlier.  General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 8 of 16 
 
 7.5 Where an employee after accepting the allotment fails to take possession 
of the accommodation within 8 days from the date of the allotment letter, 
he/she shall be charged licence fee from such date for 12 days and during 
this period of 12 days, he/she shall not be entitled for HRA.  
Provided that nothing contained in this rule shall apply where it is certified 
that the allotted resid ence is unfit for occupation and as a result thereof the 
employee is unable to occupy the residence within the aforesaid period . 
7.6 If on allotment of an alternative or entitled residence the former residence 
is not vacated by the prescribed date mentioned  in these rules or as 
specified in the allotment order , the allottee shall be liable to pay penal 
licence fee and damages for continued occupation of the former residence 
with effect from the date he/she takes possession of the newly allotted 
residence. In th e cancellation letter the exact amount of damages which 
the unauthorized occupant will be required to pay for overstay ing will be 
mentioned.  
7.7 All the allottees have to pay the electricity charges and water charges  for 
their respective residence  as per the unit rates/slab fixed by the Estate 
Officer with the approval of the Director from time to time or as per the 
actual consumption based on meter reading, whichever is higher.  
7.8 The license fee and other charges shall be deducted from the monthly 
salary of the allottee except in the event of retention of quartr.  Non-
payment of license fee and other charges for the accommodation shall 
constitute breach of these allotment rules. If the allottee fails to make 
payment of prescribed licence fee and other  charges, the allotment shall 
be cancelled.  
7.9 Charges for common services shall not be levied to the allottee. Common 
services may be, but not limited to, staircase light, common light of the 
floor/building, lift services at multi -storeyed buildings etc.  However, the 
residents may join together and share the expenses for the maintenance 
of the common areas like cleaning, gardening etc.  
7.10 When at the own request of an employee, a residence of higher than his 
entitled type is allotted, the employee concerned shal l be charged three 
times the normal licence fee for such a residence.  
7.11 The rate of penal license fee shall be as per GOI norms from time to time . 
7.12 The allottee shall be personally liable for payment of the licence fee and 
other charges for the accommodation  and for any damage, beyond 
reasonable wear and tear, caused thereto or to the furniture or fittings or 
services provided therein by Institute during the period of occupation and 
until full vacant possession thereof have been restored to Director.  
8. License free residences  
8.1 The Board may allot furnished or unfurnished accommodation without 
levying any license fee or levying such fee at concessional rates to any 
category of employees , if it considers it necessary to do so in the interest 
of Institute ( (Clause 7  (4) of Schedule ‘D’ of the Statutes of IIT 
Gandhinagar ) General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 9 of 16 
 
 8.2 The following authorities of Institute shall be provided accommodation 
without levying any license fee.  
a) Deputy Director  
b) Registrar  
c) Deans  
d) Chief Engineer  
e) Chief Medical Officer  
8.3 The list may be revised, if considered necessary, by  Board from time to 
time on the recommendation of Director.  
9. Eligibility of employees owning house   
9.1 An employee owning a house either in his/her own name or in the name of 
any member of the family at his place of duty  or local municipality  or within 
8 km of radius from Institute – whichever is higher, shall be eligible for 
allotment of residence on payment of license fee for the residence allotted 
to him /her at such rate as may be determined by Institute f rom time to 
time.  
9.2 If an employee had  already been allotted a residence and he/she or any 
member of his /her family becomes owner of a house at his place of duty or 
local municipality or within the 8  km of radius from Institute – whichever is 
higher , such e mployee shall notify the fact to Director within a period of 
one month from the date he/she/family member becomes the owner of the 
house.  
9.3 Notwithstanding the provisions under ( 9.1) and ( 9.2), an employee  shall 
become eligible for Institute residence on payment of normal licence fee, if 
the house owned by him /her or any member of the  family  ceases to be 
owned by way of sale.  
9.4 If an employee decides to apply for or to retain the residence under sub -
rules 9.1 and 9.2, he/she shall apply for retention or all otment of residence 
and if allowed to retain or allotted , he/she shall be liable to pay licence fee 
for the allotted residence as under.  
Slab of income from his/her own House  Rates of license fees to be recovered  
Income does not exceed  Rs. 12000/- per 
month  Single license fee  
Income exceeds Rs. 12000/- per month but 
less than Rs. 20000- per month  Twice the normal  license fee  
Income exceeds Rs. 20000/- per month  Thrice the normal license fee  
9.5 Any of the above provisions  (Sub -rules 9.1 to 9 .4) of this r ule shall not be 
applicable to the authorities/officers  who are declared essential staff by 
Director and are bound to reside inside the campus due to their essential 
nature of duty or otherwise.  General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 10 of 16 
 
 10. Change of residence  
10.1 An employee who has been allotted residence under these rules may 
apply for a change of residence within the entitled  type.  
10.2 Not more than one change shall be allowed within the entitled type in the 
entire service period of the employee  irrespective of whet her the change in 
allotment was accepted by the employee or not.  However,  more than one 
change of residence within the entitled  type may be allowed on medical 
grounds as mentioned in these rules . 
10.3 For the purpose of these rules, change of residence shall be  treated as 
allotment only and all such rules as applicable for the allotment, including 
time limits of occupying the residence, license fee, penalty etc. will be 
applicable. A change of residence shall not be permitted i f an inquiry is in 
progress against  an allottee about sub -letting of his /her residence.  
11. Sub-letting and sharing of accommodation  
11.1 The allottee shall not sublet part or whole of the residence allotted to 
him/her. 
11.2 An allottee who sublets part or whole of the residence allotted to him/her 
shall render himself/herself liable to cancellation of the allotment and 
eviction from the allotted residence. He/she shall also, render 
himself/herself liable to disciplinary proceedings . 
12. Non-acceptance of allotment offer or failure to occupy 
allotted res idence after acceptance  
12.1 If an y employee on receipt of an allotment order fails to accept the 
allotment of residence within five days or fails to take possession within 
eight days of the date of acceptance of the allotment order, the allotment 
order shall s tand cancelled and the concerned employee shall be debarred 
for allotment for a period of two years from the date of such cancellation.   
12.2 If any employee, in occupation of a residence of a lower type than his/her 
entitlement applies for a residence of his/h er entitled  type and on allotment 
of such entitled  type of residence fails to accept the allotment, he/she may 
be permitted to stay in the residence already in his occupation provided 
that he/she shall not be eligible for another allotment for the remainin g 
period of the same and the next allotment year.  
13. Retention of residence  
13.1 An allotment shall be effective from the date it is accepted by the 
employee and shall  continue to be in force until one of the following.  
a) expiry of the concessional period permissible under Rule 1 3.2 
b) cancelled by Director or deemed cancellation under any provision of 
these rules;  
c) surrendered by the allottee; or  
d) the allottee ceases to occupy the residence.  General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 11 of 16 
 
 13.2 A residence allotted to any employee may be allowed to be retained  based 
on his /her specific request  on the occurrence of any of the events 
mentioned below for the period specified against each from the date of such 
occurrence and on payment of license fees indicated against each of the 
event subject to the condition that t he residence is required for the bonafide 
use of the employee or the members of his /her family . 
Sr. 
No. Events  Max permissible 
period for 
retention of 
residence  License fee payable  
1. Resignation, Compulsory 
retirement or dismissal or 
removal from service  or 
termination of service , expiry 
of the re -employment/  
contract / deputation  period  2 Months  Normal License Fee.  
After this, premise to be 
vacated.  
2. Superannuation or 
Retirement  6 Months  First 3 months:  Normal 
License fees  
Next 3 months:  Double 
Licen se fee  
After this, premise to be 
vacated  
3. Death of Allottee   
(in case the deceased 
employee or his/ her 
dependent does not own a 
house at the place of duty of 
the deceased .) 
In other cases norms as in 2 
above will apply.  12 Months  First 6 months:  Normal 
License fees  
Next 6 months:  Double 
License fee  
After this, premise to be 
vacated  
4. Staff Members proceeding 
on EOL/Lien/Leave on 
Foreign Service Terms 
(FST) /Deputation in India  2 Year s Normal License Fee  plus 
HRA applicable to the 
allottee.  
Extendable for another 12 
months on convincing 
reasons to be recorded on 
payment of double licence 
fee  
 
After this, vacation of the 
premises.  
5. Leave (other than leave 
preparatory to retirement, 
leave on medical grounds, 
sabbatical leave and study 
leave)  For the period of 
leave but not 
exceeding 6 
months  Normal License fee  
6.  Sabbatical Leave/Study 
Leave  Full period of 
leave  Normal License fee  General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 12 of 16 
 
 13.3 On expiry of the maximum permissible period of retention, the allotment 
shall be deemed to have been cancelled  unless immediately before expiry 
of such concessional period the employee resumes duty.  
13.4 Notwithstanding anything contain ed here , when an employee is dismissed 
or removed from service or his services have been terminated and  
Director is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient in public interest to do 
so, he may cancel the allotment of residence of such employee either 
forthwith or with effect from such date prior to expiry of the concessional 
period referred to in Rule 1 3.2. 
13.5 Director may, for reasons t o be recorded in writing, allow retention of 
residence for a period not exceeding four months beyond the maximum 
permissible period under Rule 1 3.2, if he is satisfied that the retention of 
the residence is justified f or any of the following reasons.  
a) Educa tion of children of the employee;  
b) Serious or chronic illness in the family of the employee;  
c) Any other reason considered to be beyond the control of the employee.  
13.6 The license fee for the period of retention mentioned in Rule 1 3.5 shall be 
as decided by Director of Institute.  
13.7 After the maximum permissible period of retention indicated in Rule 1 3.2 
and further period of retention , if any,  allow ed by Director under Rule 13 .5, 
the allotment of residence shall deem to be cancelled.  
13.8 License fee  and other charges for the period of retention of the residence 
shall be payable in advance on monthly basis.  Water, Electricity and/or 
other charges shall be paid as per actuals within 7 days from the date of 
receipt of the bills raised by Institute.  
14. Overs tay in residence  
14.1 Where, after the allotment has been cancelled or is deemed to have been 
cancelled under any provisions of these rules, the residence remains or 
has remained in occupation of the employee to whom it was allotted or of 
any person claiming t hrough him, the allottee or such other person shall 
render himself liable to the following.  
a) Payment of penal licence fee for use and occupation of the residence 
and damages equivalent to twice the normal charges for furniture, 
services, garden etc.  from the date  of such cancellation or deemed 
cancellation.  
b) Disciplinary proceedings for violation of the rules in this regard will be 
as per the Statutes . 
c) Any other proceedings that may be taken up at the discretion of 
Director for getting the residence vacated  including actions under 
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 as 
amended from time to time.  
15. Surrender of the residence  
15.1 An allottee may at any time surrender the allotment by giving notice to the 
Competent Authority at least seven days prior to the date of vacation of General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 13 of 16 
 
 the residence. The allotment of the residence shall be deemed to be 
cancelled with effect from the 8th day after the date on which the notice is 
received by the competent authority  or the date specified in the notice, 
whichever is later . However, the Director may accept a notice for  a shorter 
period than 7 days.  
15.2 An employee who surrenders the residence under Rule 1 5.1 shall not be 
considered again for allotment of residence at the Institute  for a period of 
one year from the date of such surrender . 
16. Undertaking by the allottee  
16.1 Each allottee  shall give an undertaking at the time of allotment of 
residence that he /she shall vacate the residence on cancellation or 
deemed cancellation of al lotment failing which he /she shall be liable to pay 
penal licence fee and that the Institute shall have authority to withhold 
his/her gratuity and leave encashment etc.  
Provided that gratuity and leave encashment etc., may be released on 
furnishing of bank guarantee by the employee for an equivalent amount. 
Bank guarantee shall be discharged after vacant possession of the 
residence is surrendered to the Institute and all the dues relating to the 
residence have been settled, failing which the bank guarantee shall be 
invoked.   
17. Temporary allotment of residen ce on account of marriage 
etc. i n the family of allottee  
On receipt of an application,  Director may make temporary allo tment, not 
exceeding five days including the day of marriage etc., to an allottee if a vacant 
residence is available or likely to be available during the period for which 
allotment has been applied for.  
18. Breach of rules and conditions  
18.1 If an allottee sublets  the residence OR charges Ii cenc e fee from the sharer 
at a rate which Director considers excessive OR erects any unauthorized 
structure in any part of the residence OR uses the residence or any portion 
thereof for purposes other than that for which it has been allotted OR 
tampers with the electric or water connections OR commits any other 
breach of rules or of the terms and conditions of the allotment OR uses the 
residence or premises or allows it to be used for any purposes which 
Director considers to be i mproper OR conducts himself in a manner which 
in the opinion of Director is prejudicial to the maintenance of harmonious 
relations with his /her neighbors OR has knowingly furnished incorrect 
information in any application or written statement with a view to securing 
the allotment,  Director may, without prejudice to any other action including 
disciplinary proceedings that may be taken against such  allottee, cancel 
the allotment after giving show cause notice.  
Explanation:  In this rule the expression allottee includes, unless the 
context otherwise requires, a member of the family of the allottee and any 
other person claiming through the allottee.   General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 14 of 16 
 
 18.2 If the allottee sublets his residence or any portion thereof or any of the out -
house, garages appurtenant thereto in contravention of these rules he /she 
may without prejudice to any other action that may be taken against 
him/her, be charged penal licence f ee/damages as laid down in these 
rules. The employee may also be debarred from sharing the residence in 
future for a period not exceeding 5 years as may be decided by Director.  
18.3 Where action to cancel the allotment is taken on account of subletting of 
the whole or part of the allotted residence a period of 60 days shall be 
allowed to the allottee and any other person residing with him /her to 
vacate the residence. The allotment shall be cancelled with effect from the 
date of vacation of the premises or on ex piry of 60 days from the date of 
order for cancellation of allotment, whichever is earlier.  
18.4 Where the allotment of residence is cancelled for conduct prejudicial to the 
maintenance of harmonious relations with the neighbours, the allottee, at 
the discreti on of Director , may be allotted another residence of the same 
type at any other place.  
18.5 Director , on the recommendation of the H AC/Estate Officer , shall have  the 
power to take all or any of the actions under these rules and to declare the 
allottee ineligible for allotment for a period not exceeding 5 years . 
19. Estate officer  
19.1 Normally, Superintending Engineer  (SE) shall discharge the functions and 
responsibilities of the Estate Officer .  In the absence of a Superintending 
Engineer, the officer designated by Director  shall discharge the functions 
of the Estate Officer.  
20. Punitive actions  
The administration or any other authorized office by Director on conducting an 
enquiry can recommend suitable punitive action for unauthorized occupation/ 
violation of code of conduct/breach of rules etc. applicable to the allottee of 
Institute residence u nder these rules or any law enacted by the Government of 
India from time to time.  
20.1 An unauthorized occupant will be liable to eviction by the competent 
authority under Public Premise ( Eviction  of unauthorised occupants) Act, 
1971 as amended from time to tim e. 
20.2 For the period of unauthorised occupation, a person shall be charged 
penal license fee as decided by the Institute from time to time.  
Such penal license fee shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be a charge 
on salary or any amount due to the employee an d the Institute shall be 
entitled to deduct or set -off such penal license fee from the amount due to 
him/her.  
20.3 Institute shall disconnect the electricity, water and/or Institute telephone, if 
any, at any time after the service of fifteen days’ notice to the  concerned 
employee.  
20.4 In addition to the provisions in these rules, the competent authority may 
take disciplinary action in accordance with the relevant rules/statutes/law  
as made applicable to the employee of I nstitute . General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 15 of 16 
 
 21. Interpretation of rules and saving clause  
21.1 If a question as to the interpretation of these rules arises, Director shall be  
the competent  authority  to decide the same.  
21.2 If any matter/ provision is not covered in these rules or wherever residence 
allotment rules are silent, the relevant provisio ns of Government of India 
shall be applicable.  
22. Appeal  
22.1 An employee aggrieved by the decision or order of Director under these 
rules  may appeal in writing to Board within 21 days of receipt of such a 
decision or order. However, the decision or order of Direc tor shall stand 
unless it is modified or rescinded as a result of such appeal of the 
employee.  
23. Relaxation of rules  
23.1 Director for reasons to be recorded in writing,  may recommend relaxation 
of any of the provisions of these rules in case of an employee or class of 
employees or residence or type of residences including cases where 
waiving off of the penal Iicence fee is involved, to Board  who shall have 
the power to relax .  General Administration Advisory 30 (Version 1.0, September 2023)              Page 16 of 16 
 
 Annexure -I: Application for residence allotment  
 
1. Name of the Applicant  :  
2. Employee ID Number  :  
3. Email ID  :  
4. Designation and Department  :  
5. Whether Person with Disability (YES/NO). If 
yes, provide details thereof.  :  
6. Present Residential Address  :  
7. Whether owns a house in own name or in the 
name of his/her family. [Y/N]  :  
If Yes, give the full details like name of the 
owner, relation with the applicant, location of 
the house, date of acquiring the ownership 
etc. :  
Income from the house, if any  :  
8. First Choice of Residence  
Second Choice of Residence  
Third Choice of Residence  : 
: 
: 
  
Certified that the information furnished above  are complete and correct to the best of 
my knowledge and I have not suppressed any relevant information. In the event of 
any change in the particulars given above which affect my eligibility, I undertake to 
intimate the same promptly. Further, I am aware that if at any stage the 
information/documents furnished above is found to be false, I am liable for 
disciplinary action.  
Date:            Signature  
Office to record, Pay Level, Pay, Date of Joining the institute, Date of birth  etc. General Administration Advisory 13 (Version 1.0, October 2014 ) Page 1 of 1 
  
 
 
 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
RELOCATION EXPENSES TO THE NON -TEACHING STAFF OF IITGN  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 14th meeting held on 02 August 2014 ) 
 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 14th meeting held on 02 August 2014 approved 
the following norms for reimburse ment of relocation expenses to new non-teaching staff  
joining  the Institute:  
1. The reimbursement of relocation expenses will be applicable only to those staff 
members who at the time of joining IIT Gandhinagar happen to be working in a 
regular position in a government organization (Central or State) and its autonomous 
bodies  or public sector enterprises . 
2. The cost of travel for self and eligible dependents from the place of employee’s 
residence to the Institute by public tran sport as per the entitlement of the post to 
which the employee has been appointed.  
3. The employee may also be reimbursed expenses for transportation of personal 
effects as per rates applicable for the case of a Central Government employee in 
case of transfer . 
4. The reimbursement approved in all cases will be subject to the condition that if the 
employee , for what ever reason leaves the services of the Institute before completion 
of a period of three years after joining , the Institute may recover the above reloca tion 
expenses.  
5. Prior approval of the competent authority must be obtained for availing relocation 
expenses.  
 
 
 
Academic Affairs Advisory 43 (Version 1.1, January 202 4)  Page 1 of 2 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
Summer Research Internship Program (SRIP) for Students  
 
 
Objective  
 
To facilitate students from other institutions  (including international students pursuing 
bachelor’s or master’s degree in India)  as well as IITGN to spend their summer at IITGN  
immersed in high quality research.  
 
Features  
1. A weekly stipend of INR 2,000 for the participation of at least eight weeks is provided 
to most interns.  
2. Hostel accommodation charges must be paid by all SRIP interns.  
3. Access is given to all IITGN facilities such as the library, labs, lounge, classrooms, 
sports complex, and internet; participation in all institute events such as short courses, 
workshops, and courses.  
4. Mentorship is by IITGN faculty on high -end research projects covering a wide spectrum 
of disciplines.  
5. A certificate of participation is given upon successful completion of the internship and 
submission of the report.  
 
For IITGN Faculty  
 
1. The selection of interns for a specific project will be at the discretion of the respective 
faculty members.  
2. The main objective of the internship is to have a close association of faculty and interns 
to do state -of-the-art research. Faculty taking a vacation of more than two weeks 
during the period of the internship should avoid floating projects unless there is another 
faculty member involved in the project.  
3. A maximum of one internal (IITGN student) and one external intern per faculty member 
will be funded by the Institute for the entire internship duration.  
4. A faculty member may supervise and guide additional interns (external and internal) 
beyond the two that are financially supported by the Institute. These interns will also 
have to pay the prevailing hostel charges. Faculty members may choose to support 
these interns through their CPDA, PDA, and project(s). The stipend may be flexible, 
but faculty members are encouraged to pay the interns enough to cover the hostel 
charges at least.  
5. For faculty willing to accommodate interns recommended by the institute (e.g., IITRAM 
students, FFE students, or students coming in through other partnerships), a stipend 
may come from the Institute on a case -to-case basis. These interns will be counted 
separately from the two institute -supported interns. These interns will also typically 
have to pay the prevailing hostel charges.  
6. For interns selected through competitive internship programs (e.g., Indian Academy of 
Sciences internships), the stipends will generally be paid by an external agency. 
However, these students must also pay the prevailing hostel charges.  
7. Supervisor(s) will closely monitor the progress of the intern(s) and collect feedback 
about their satisfactory performance at periodic intervals.  
8. Supervisor(s) must urge the summer interns to prepare their reports and submit them 
before they leave IITGN. In case of any delay in report preparation, SRIP coordinators 
should be informed in advance.   
Academic Affairs Advisory 43 (Version 1.1, January 202 4)  Page 2 of 2 
 
9. SRIP certificates will be issued only by the SRIP coordinators and not by individual 
supervisors.  
 
For Interns  
 
1. Interns are required to submit a one page research proposal to SRIP coordinators 
within one week of their joining. The proposal should be written in consultation with the 
faculty advisor and should provide details on the aim, methodology, and outcome 
measu res of the intended work.  
2. Interns should give their best effort in their projects and meet the expectations of the 
IITGN faculty regarding the quality and quantity of research work undertaken.  
3. Interns are encouraged to use IITGN facilities such as the library, subscribed journals, 
and research labs during their internship. However, these facilities must be used 
responsibly and generally only for the internship project. Interns must abide by 
guidelines for the usage of such facilities.  
4. SRIP interns are expected to be present on campus during the entire internship period. 
SRIP coordinators may record attendance.  
5. Before taking any leave or vacation during the program, interns must take the approval 
of both the supervisor and SRIP coordinators.  
6. Interns are advised to contact SRIP coordinators for any assistance and counseling 
during the internship period.  
7. The student should remain in constant touch with project supervisors for technical 
assistance with regard to the project.  
8. Interns are encouraged to participate in summer events in IITGN, such as Summer 
Camp, Hall Bol, etc.  
9. Interns are required to submit a satisfactory final report and a final presentation on a 
scheduled date for successful completion and issue of the certificate.  
10. Interns are encouraged to continue their work even after completing the internship.  
11. Interns are required to furnish their complete bank account details (with IFSC code) to 
avoid delay in the disbursal of stipend as soon as possible.  
12. In general, interns are required to adhere to the high ethical and moral values of IITGN 
and follow the high standards set by IITGN during the internship period. Any intern 
guilty of wrongdoing will be terminated from the internship, and the parent institu tion 
will be duly informed.  
 
For Internal (IITGN) Students only  
 
1. IITGN students registered for summer course(s) are not permitted to participate in 
SRIP.  
2. It is compulsory for the internal interns to present their work in the form of posters/ 
presentations at the end of the internship period and also likely during the following 
semester.  
 
Typical Timeline for SRIP  
 
Old Date   Event  
February 5   Floating of SRIP projects by faculty members  
March 5   Last date of accepting SRIP applications from students  
March 22   Notification to selected SRIP candidates  
March 25   Deadline for selected candidates to send acceptance of the offer  
March 28   Notification to waitlisted candidates (if required)  
March 31   Deadline for waitlisted candidates to send acceptance of the offer  
May 8 - July 16  Period of internship  
 Academic Affairs Advisory 60 (Version 2.0, October 2023)                                                Page 1 of 1  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  NORMS FOR PROFICIENCY TRANSCRIPT  (As approved by Senate in its 62nd meeting held on 27 December 2022 and  in its 66th meeting held on 16 October 2023)  1. All students shall be provided an “Academic Transcript”, which will contain the grade details of all courses taken towards meeting graduation requirements. This shall include courses which are part of Minor(s), Honours, Double Major, Dual Degree and also courses which have been repeated or substituted for grade improvement.   2. Students who opt for doing any additional learning courses shall be provided a transcript covering grades for successfully completed additional courses only. The grades for such courses shall be reported as Pass (P) irrespective of the actual level of grade obtained. This transcript is referred to as the “Proficiency Transcript”. Such additional courses shall include courses which are taken as part of additional learning including short courses, additional elective courses and additional project courses.  3. Students can declare a course as “Additional Learning” any time during their programme or at the time of graduation claim. Courses once declared as for “Additional Learning” cannot be considered for including in the Academic Transcript. 4. Courses declared as “Additional Learning”, in which a student secures a failing grade will not be included in the transcripts.   Academic Affairs Advisory 46 (Version 1.0, December  2022 )                         Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
Leave N orms for Full-Time Students  
 
(As approved by the Senate in its 62nd meeting held on 27th December 2022)  
 
Ordinary Leave  
 A full -time PhD/MTech student may be allowed up to 30 days leave in an academic 
year (July to June), including for medical reasons.  All other full time -students may be 
allowed up to 10 days of leave in an academic year.  
 In addition, students in BSc/BTech/MSc/MA /PGDIIT  programmes are eligible for mid -
semester breaks, summer break and winte r break.   
 A maximum absence of 9 continuous days including holidays, leave etc. can be availed 
only once when the semester is operational.   
 Leave not availed in a year will not be carried forward to the next year.  
 Intervening Saturdays, Sundays or holidays  are counted towards leave.  
 Sanctioning of the leave and maintenance of such ordinary leave records will be done 
at the discipline level.  
Leave of Absence for Academic Work  
 A student may be sanctioned leave of absence for academic work, with or without 
fellowship for up to one year , primarily for professional reasons. This also includes 
attendance in seminars/conferences in India/abroad and time spent at other Institutes.   
 The leave of absence will be approved by the Dean, Academic Affairs on 
recommendation of the faculty advisor.   
Other Leaves  
 Full-time students are entitled to leave due to medical conditions related to  pregnancy, 
up to a semester including the inter semester breaks (minimum of 60 days and a 
maximum of 180 days) only once during the tenure of their studentship. During this 
time, the student shall be considered on a semester drop. The student may choose t o 
draw fellowship, if applicable, or may put it on hold. The total fellowship duration shall 
not exceed as stipulated by the Government of India.   
 In addition, 60 days of child care leave (with optional fellowship as defined earlier) will 
be available for eligible women students once during the tenure of their studentship. 
However, the student could choose not to take this additional leave in the interest of 
timely completion of their academic programme.  
 Such leaves will be sanctioned by the Dean (Academic Affairs) upon recommendation 
of the faculty advisor.  
Note : 
 Any student absent unauthorized for four weeks during a semester is liable for 
termination.   
 
All students must apply for leave well before the date on which the leave is expected to start. 
Retroac tive leaves will be approved only in exceptional circumstances.  Extra ordinary leaves 
can be approved by the Chairman, Senate on recommendation of the Dean, Academic Affairs.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 3 1 (Version 1.0, December 2021)                                      Page 1 of 1 
 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAG AR 
 
ARTIST -IN-RESIDENCE PROGRAMME  
(As approved by the BOG in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021)  
 
 
IIT Gandhinagar’s curricular and co -curricular programs promote liberalism, 
inclusivity, interdisciplinarity,  and creativity. As part of that effort, the Institute strives 
to offer its students opportunities for creative and artistic expression. The Board of 
Governors of the Institute in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021 approved to 
create an Artist -in-Residence programme , which intends to bring Artists to the 
Institute campus to engage with its students and the larger community.  
 
The Artist -in-Residence programme is envisi oned to host individuals passionately 
involved in artistic expression (e.g., sculpture, painting, film, theatre, music, etc.) to 
engage in creation, collaboration, and dialogue with the IITGN community. An Artist -
in-Residence would ideally undertake or/and  guide projects with community 
members in their domains of expertise. The programme enables artists to be 
embedded within the institution's unique culture and provides opportunities for 
interdisciplinary community engagement. The programme also aims to fac ilitate 
dialogue, exchange of experiences and skills across disciplinary boundaries. It also 
allows artists to work and develop innovative projects to promote a vibrant 
community of artists and art enthusiasts on campus.  
 
The Artist -in-Residence is expect ed to spend a minimum of four weeks at the 
Institute. Artists from India or abroad, hosted under this scheme, may utilize the 
period in residence to:  
 
● Create artistic expressions  
● Collaborate with IITGN Community members to co -create artistic expressio ns 
● Nurture the artistic talent of IITGN Community members  
● Conduct workshops, activities and events to promote Art initiatives at the Institute  
● Offer courses to students  
 
Artist -in-Residence will be provided with:  
 
● To and fro air fare by economy class as per Institutional norms  
● Access to IITGN Facilities and Studio spaces  
● Rent free accommodation  
● OPD facilities in the medical centre at par with those available to faculty of IITGN  
● Office space and access to Library facilities  
● An honorariu m  
 
Artists under this scheme will be selected by the Standing Committee on Faculty 
Affairs, which will evaluate nominations and proposals based on the candidate’s 
background, significance and potential impact of the visit, schedule of activities, etc.  
 
The Standing Committee on Faculty Affairs may decide the honorarium to be 
offered, which is presently expected to range from Rs. 20,000 to Rs. 40,000 per 
week. The range of honorarium may be revised from time to time. The Standing 
Committee may also, in exce ptional cases, approve visits of less than four weeks.  Academic Affairs Advisory 62 (Version 1.0, July 2023)                                            Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
BHALODIA -KHETAN SUMMER RESEARCH EXCELLENCE AWARD   
(Updated as per BoG approvals upto 37th meeting held on 13 May 2023)  
 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 37th meeting held on 13 May 2023 
established the “Bhalodia -Khetan Summer Research Excellence Award (SREA)” 
with following terms and conditions.  
 
1. The SREA shall comprise of a monetary award and a certificate of excellence.  
2. Each year, the research done by studen ts during the IIT Gandhinagar Summer 
Research Internship Program ( SRIP ) shall be evaluated by a duly constituted 
Committee of IITGN faculty members. The committee may solicit views of other 
experts in the field, if necessary.  
3. Any student who has fulfilled the requirements of the SRIP and received the 
SRIP completion  certificate in that year will be eligible for the award.  
4. The criteria used for evaluating excellence  may include the originality of the work, 
potential f or publication in reputed conferences/journals, generation of  intellectual 
property, creating societal impact, etc.  
5. The Committee shall weight the different criteria appropriately and arrive at an 
overall excellence score. To preserve the spirit of excelle nce, the evaluation 
committee may decide a minimum score needed to qualify for an award.  
6. In a year when no deserving candidate is found, the funds available  for the award 
that year shall be accrued and used for awards in subsequent year(s).  
7. Based on the e xperience gained, the criteria and guidelines for the award may be 
revised from time  to time.  
8. Initially, three (3) Summer Research Excellence Awards shall be given each year. 
To promote excellence in diverse areas, these awards may be distributed 
appropria tely - one each in (a) Natural  Sciences, (b) Engineering and Applied 
Sciences, and (c) Humanities and Social Sciences.  
9. The selection of the award recipient will be made without any discrimination or 
bias of any kind.  
10. The Committee shall decide an appropriate forum to present and honor the 
recipients. IITGN shall annually provide to the Donors (as long as either Donor is 
living) and to IITGNF, a fund utilization  and year -ending balance statement, as 
well as a list of the award recipients.  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
Advisory for Manuscript Writing Retreat  
 
The multi -dimensional academic life of faculty members poses a busy calendar to deal 
with on a day to day basis. Faculty members  multitask while dealing with their 
commitments on multiple fronts in teaching, service, projects, outreach, networking, 
etc. With several of time -sensitive items in the list, manuscript writing work may at 
times take a back seat. The students, project staff and faculty member s of a research 
group  work together on a research topic while focusing on different aspects of the work 
through analysis and experiments. Research groups also keep evolving new ideas 
while deep -diving into the concepts and analytics. It is equally essential to co nsolidate 
some of those thoughts and developments in a timely manner, and also to disseminate 
the findings through their scholarly articles for the benefit of the research and 
professional communities. Manuscript writing requires the group to work together  in a 
focused manner while compiling their variety of inputs and thoughts where the faculty 
member leads the process. It may be helpful to a faculty member to step away from 
the daily routine for some time and have complete focus on manuscript writing.   
 
With an objective to create qualit y time for writing manuscripts, a scheme for 
“Manuscript  Writing Retreat”  has been created , where a faculty member along with  a 
few of research students , post -doctoral fellows, project staff and other faculty 
members from t he group can spend about a week  together at a place other than their 
regular workspace. In this scheme:  
 
● The proposing faculty member may opt for the retreat at any place within 300 
kms from the campus.  
● The faculty member and all other group members  will be considered to be on 
duty. All group members are expected to volunteer to be part of the retreat and 
there should be no pressure on the m to participate in the retreat.  
● The faculty member will make alternative arrangements for other Institutional 
commitments during the period of the retreat.  Timing of the trip should be 
planned and managed in such a way that it does not affect the teaching 
commitments of the faculty members  and class attendance of the students 
joining the trip.  
● Complete duration of t he retreat should be dedicated to the work related to 
manuscript writing. The whole group is expected to strictly adhere to this 
requirement and this retreat  should not be seen  as a sight -seeing  opportunity.   
● Reasonable costs for travel and boarding/lodging will be covered by the 
Institute  through R&D Funds . Any a dditional funds needed to cover the genuine 
expenses can be taken from CPDA/PDA/projects.  
Rese arch and Development Advisory 15  (Version 1.0,  August  2020)                     Page 1 of 2 
  
● The faculty member and the students may also choose to stay in the Institute 
Guesthouse.  
 
The faculty members can apply for this scheme any time of the year. The application 
should include the names of the research group members , estimated budget , status 
of the work in reference, and a clear -cut plan for writing of  manuscript s. The 
applications will be reviewed by the Deans of faculty affairs office and R&D office, and 
approved by the Director. After return from the retreat, faculty members are ex pected 
to submit a report  indicating the overall experience and the status of the manuscripts 
which were targeted to be prepared during the visit.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Research and Development Advisory 15 (Version 1.0,  August  2020)                     Page 2 of  2 Academic	Affairs	Advisory	56	(Version	1.0,	May	2022)																									Page	1	of	2	INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  Norms for IITGN Focus School  (As approved by the BoG in its 34th meeting held on 28 April 2022)  1. Introduction:  “Focus School” at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Gandhinagar, will be operated by IITGN-X.  2. Objective: This program is mainly intended to train students graduating from various institutes in new and emerging areas and improve their professional preparedness. Some programs under this initiative may also be designed specifically for working professionals and school children.  3. Eligibility:  (a) Some programs would primarily be designed for students pursuing their undergraduate studies. Students who are in the final year of their undergraduate degree are eligible to join such programs. These may also be open to working professionals with an undergraduate degree.  (b) Some programs may be designed for working professionals with a focus on knowledge enhancement in a specific area like public health engineering, where the students may also be permitted to attend.  (c) Some programs may be designed for other student groups (including high school students, diploma students etc.) with their own eligibility criteria and duration as applicable to their objectives. The process of approval will remain the same. 4. Course Structure:  A successful candidate is required to clear a minimum of 12 credits through courses, with each course generally having 1 to 4 credits. Typically, the courses may be covered over 10 to 12 weeks for 12 credit programs and could be spread over a year for programs with 20 credits or more. The courses will be generally conducted online, covering the following three broad areas:    ● Foundational courses: Review of basics, which are relevant to the technology area of the program (minimum 2 credits). ● Core courses: Content related to new technology, which are usually not part of a regular undergraduate program (minimum 6 credits). ● Leadership Skills courses: Courses in communication, teamwork, and initiative (1 to 4 credits). The percentage of each of the above-mentioned components needs to be designed and approved separately before the start of a program.   Academic	Affairs	Advisory	56	(Version	1.0,	May	2022)																									Page	2	of	2	5. Selection Process:  Each program will be designed and approved separately, keeping in mind the relevance of the program. The selection process may include a written test and/or interview.   6. Assessment and Qualification:  ● The program will be designed to have a continuous rigorous evaluation of the performance of the candidate.  ● All courses will have Pass/Fail grade. ● Candidates who are not clearing the required credits during the duration of the focus school may be provided one additional opportunity to clear the program after the end of the program, within a reasonable time as approved at the time of initiation of the focus school.   7. Operational Aspects  ● The programs will be offered by IITGN-X by engaging the interested faculty members from the Institute and outside. ● The honorarium and/or coordination fees to the resource persons would be paid as per the norms of IITGN-X. The coordinators can invite resource persons (instructors and teaching associates) for conducting the courses or sessions or for assisting in the same. ● The fees for each Focus School may be proposed by IITGN-X at the time of offering it for approval by the Director. ● The courses offered by the institute in other programs may be extended to Focus School students with prior permission on a case-to-case basis.  ● While designing the program, the proposals should account for the target audience and the interest group.     Academic Affairs  Advisory 55 (Version 2.0, November 2022 )                         Page 1 of 3 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
Norms for e -Masters Degree Programme  
 (As approved by the BoG in its 3 4th meeting held on 28 April 2022  and updated in the 61st meeting of 
the Senate held on 15th November 2022 ) 
 
Overview:  The rapidly evolving technology landscape is making it indispensable for 
professionals to continually upgrade their skill sets. A platform that enables practicing 
professionals to build expertise in a focused knowledge domain is expected to add 
immense va lue to individuals as well as corporate organizations. To create such a 
platform, an e -Masters degree program  has been introduced  at IITGN. The candidates 
admitted under this program would typically undertake 48 credits of coursework 
focusing on an adva nced knowledge domain. The program may be in areas of our 
expertise or in areas addressing present societal needs, like Safety Engineering, 
Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Data Science. The program would be 
generally spread over a duration o f 1 year; this program would not have a thesis 
requirement.  
 
The following points summarize some important aspects of the program:  
 
1. Scope and Principle  
● This program is intended for working professionals who wish to enhance their 
knowledge in emerging areas.  
● The program has a flexible executive -friendly structure enabling the enrolled 
candidates to concurrently work in their existing professions.  
● The program is designed for a duration ranging from 6 months to 2 years, 
depending on the nature of the dom ain in which e -Masters would be offered.  
● The participants enrolled in the program are expected to complete the 
program requirements in a maximum of 3 years.  
 
2. Admissions  
● Details of the specific program (nature of the domain in which e -Masters is 
proposed t o be offered, suite of courses required for specialization) would be 
developed by a faculty group or discipline, and presented before the SAPC 
and the Senate for further consideration.  
● The academic office would develop the corresponding implementation deta ils 
(e.g. number of positions available, supplementary advertisement) from time 
to time in consultation with the faculty group or discipline.  
● Candidates with Bachelor’s degree will be eligible to apply to this program; 
they are not required to have a GATE score.  
● Candidates, with two or more years of cumulative experience, would be given 
a preference. Candidates with excellent academic records may, however, be 
provided an exception.  
● Specific programs may develop their own criteria from time to time, over a nd 
above the Senate -approved minimum qualifications, for shortlisting the best 
candidates.  Academic Affairs  Advisory 55 (Version 2.0, November 2022 )                         Page 2 of 3 
 ● The shortlisted candidates would appear for a written test and/or interview 
conducted by the specific programs based on which their final selection would 
be made. S pecific programs may decide from time to time a suitable mode 
(online or offline) for conducting the written test/interview.   
● The recommendations for admissions will be made through the Dean of 
Academic Affairs to the Director for approval.   
  
3. Educational  plan  
● The candidates enrolled in the e -Masters programme are expected to earn a 
minimum of 48 credits of coursework , including 8 credits (minimum) of capstone 
project , by completing a suite of courses recommended for specialization.  
● The coursework will consist of the following components:  
- Foundational Courses to rebuild the fundamentals in the focused domain 
(minimum of 4 credits)  
- Core Courses to build expertise in the focused domain (minimum of 16 
credits)  
- Humanities and leaderships courses to nurture critical thinking, 
creativity, communication, teamwork, and initiatives (minimum of 4 
credits)  
- 8 credits (minimum) of capstone project  to find solutions to industry 
relevant design problems in an independent fashion.  The 8 credits can be 
divided in to two projects of 4 credits each . 
● The courses would integrate synchronous and asynchronous modes of 
learning. The schedules may be designed such that the live sessions would 
be conducted over the weekends, suited to the schedules of working 
professionals.  These live sessions would be complemented by the self -paced 
learning components (reading material and recorded videos), helping the 
professionals to learn at their disposal.  
● The courses offered by the institute in other programs may be extended to e -
Maste rs students with prior permission on a case -to-case basis.  
● The courses offered in this program may be aligned with the regular semester 
or the summer term.  
● The candidates enrolled in this program are expected to spend a minimum of 
two weeks on campus, whi ch would enable them to experience campus, 
obtain hands -on learning through lab sessions, network with experienced 
professionals, and complete any in -person evaluations. Candidates, who 
intend to stay on campus for durations longer than two weeks, would be  
suitably facilitated for the same.  
● The residency requirement may be waived for some programs and 
international candidates. In such scenarios, an equivalent academic 
requirement should be appropriately designed by the specific program and 
fulfilled by the  participant.  
● The courses would generally be conducted through online learning platforms 
by subject -matter experts from industry and academia from India and abroad.  
● The honorarium and/or coordination fees to the resource persons would be Academic Affairs  Advisory 55 (Version 2.0, November 2022 )                         Page 3 of 3 
 paid as per the n orms of IITGN -X. The coordinators can invite resource 
persons (instructors and teaching associates) for conducting the courses or 
sessions for assisting in the same. For some courses, a higher rate of 
honorarium/coordination fees may be needed. In such cas es, IITGN -X will 
negotiate with the internal and external stakeholders, and accordingly propose 
it to the Director for approval, through Dean R&D, from time to time.  
 
4. Assessment  
● The performance evaluation of a candidate would be carried out by awarding 
a letter grade in each of his/her courses by the concerned Instructor -in-
Charge. A performance index (PI, weighted average of grade points in all the 
courses accredited) would be maintained for these candidates.  
● The candidates would have a maximum of 3 years  to complete the program.  
● e-Masters students, who are unable to complete the program, would have the 
provision to change the program to Focus School Program, as an exit option. 
Hence, a Focus School Program would also be approved along with an e -
Master pro gram under the same title, which can also be offered independently 
from time to time to other candidates.  
 
5. Outcome  
● The candidates enrolled in this programme would be considered regular 
students of the institute. Accordingly, they would have access to all facilities 
on campus including Laboratories, Library, Career Development Services, 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship Center. They would also be granted an 
Alumni status upon successful completion.  
● The candidates successfully completing this program would be conferred an 
e-Master’s degree (e.g. e -Master’s in Data Analytics, e -Master’s in Safety 
Engineering)  
● If a candidate plans to join another program at IITGN, during or after the e -
Masters, the credits earned by the candidate in all courses except the 
foundat ional courses would be transferred.  
 
6. Fee Structure  
● A registration fee of Rs. 1,20,000 will be charged for this program.  
● The candidates enrolled in this program would be required to pay a tuition fee 
of Rs 10,000 per registered credit. This fee includes the  hostel fees 
corresponding to the minimum residential requirement. The candidates would 
be required to pay the tuition fees in three installments - the first installment 
would be for 8 credits, the second installment would be for 12 credits, and the 
third installment would be for the remaining credits of the program. Any 
additional or repeat credits would be charged at the same rate.  
● Some candidates may be offered scholarships covering partial or full tuition 
fees on the recommendation of the Dean of Stude nt Affairs/Dean of Academic 
Affairs and approval by the Director.  
● The candidates would pay charges for meals etc. as applicable for the 
residency period.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 23 (Version 1.0, January 201 9) Page 1 of 2 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS  FOR AVAILING  SABBATICAL LEAVE  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 2 4th meeting held on 27 July 2018 and  
25th meeting held on 03 December 2018 ) 
 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 25th meeting held on 03 December 2018 
approved  the following norms for administration of sabbatical leave:  
(a) A faculty member may avail six -month or one -year sabbatical (including the 
duration of vacation). However, the faculty member may be granted in addition 
any other leave up to a maximum of 120 days which the member might have 
earned during the service at th e Institute.  
(b) One will be eligible for the first sabbatical, after completion of six years or more of 
continuous service with the Institute as a faculty member. The period spent as a 
faculty on contract, or leave from another institute or deputation may be  counted.   
(c) For subsequent sabbaticals:  
(i) One will be eligible for a one -year sabbatical six years after returning from a 
previous sabbatical.  
(ii) One will be eligible for a six -month sabbatical four years after returning from 
a previous sabbatical.  
(d) Where the faculty member has availed of special leave or deputation for a period 
of one year or more, the requirements of four years and six years in para (b) and 
(c) above will be counted after his return from such special leave or deputation.  
(e) The sabbat ical period should be aligned with the semester system at IITGN, such 
that one does not miss more than one semester of teaching in case of six -month 
sabbatical, and does not miss more than two semesters of teaching in case of 
one-year sabbatical. Thus, if someone avails of a sabbatical from October 1 
(middle of the semester) to March 31 (middle of the next semester), it will be 
treated as a “one -year sabbatical” (and not a “six -month sabbatical” even though 
the person was away for only six months) for the a bove purposes.  
(f) A faculty member may avail upto a total of three years (that is, six semesters) of 
sabbatical leaves during the entire service and this may consist of a combination 
of one -year (two semester) and six month (one semester) sabbaticals.  
(g) During  sabbatical, faculty members may be paid full salary and allowances as 
admissible under normal rules. However, s/he will not be eligible for transport 
allowance or any other extra allowance in India or aboard.  
(h) Faculty members shall not undertake any regul ar appointment  (in India or aboard)  
during their sabbatical period. However, they will  be free to receive a scholarship 
or fellowship or bursary or any other „adhoc‟  honorarium other than his /her regular 
employment.  
(i) Faculty members availing sabbatical leav e may be allowed to manage their 
projects, submit reports to their sponsors, guid e thesis students, etc. However, 
this is subject to satisfaction of the Institute authorities that this is not likely to put 
the Institute in a difficulty with respect to a sp onsoring agency or with respect to 
progress of the student in thesis.   Faculty Affairs Advisory 23 (Version 1.0, January 201 9) Page 2 of 2 
 (j) Faculty members may use any funds available in their CPDA/PDA for professional 
activities during the sabbatical period.  
(k) If member of the Senate, the faculty members on sabbatical may c hoose to 
participate in the Senate meetings at their discretion.  
(l) Faculty members may avail other amenities in the Institute campus, such as the 
health centre during the sabbatical.  
(m) Faculty Member s availing sabbatical leave shall furnish a bond in the prescribed 
form to serve the Institute for a minimum period of three years on return to duty  
after a one -year sabbatical, and a minimum period of two years on return to duty 
after a six -month sabbatica l.  
(n) The faculty member  shall be required to pay to the Institute, a sum equal to the 
salary including allowances drawn by him/her from the Institute during the period 
of such leave together with interest thereon at the rate in force on Government 
loans, if  he/she fails to serve the Institute for the period specified above in (m) 
after completion of Sabbatical/ Study Leave.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 1 4 (Version 4.0, September  2014)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 
EXCEPTIONS OF ACADEMIC LEAVE TO FACULTY IN PURSUIT OF EXCELLENCE  
(As approved by the BoG in its first meeting held on 18 December 2009 and  
revised in  11th meeting held on 11 August 2013 and 14th meeting held on  02 August 2014)  
 
The Board of Governors in its first meeting had recognized the need to provide to young 
faculty members (tho se who have note already studied  or worked in a technologically 
advanced country) an international exposure early in the career, e ven without waiting for 
confirmation in service. The Board had approved following norms for exceptions for 
academic leave to address this need with the provision that these be reviewed periodically 
and suitably modified in light of the experience gained:  
 
(i) Faculty eligible for exceptions must:  
a. Have served the Institute at least for a semester . 
b. Have not studied or worked for more than a year in a technologically -
advanced nation overseas.  
c. Be seeking leave to avail an opportunity to carry out research in repu ted 
academic/ research institutions in a technologically advanced country . 
 
(ii) Maximum duration of such a leave will be one academic year (plus summer or winter 
vacation as the case may be). For instance: a) A person may be allowed to go in May 
and return the  next year in July (without being absent for more than two semesters), 
and b) A faculty member going in October must return by July next year (so as not to be 
absent for more than two semesters).  However, the Standing Committee may increase 
the maximum dur ation of such a leave to two years on a case -by-case basis.  
 
(iii) If a faculty member has lined up funding on his/her own accord from the host institute 
and wishes to avail the opportunity at no cost to the Institute, he/she will be granted 
special leave (witho ut pay and allowances). Such leave period will be eligible for 
reckoning as qualifying period of service for all other benefits, including increments.  
 
(iv) Institute will also encourage faculty members to apply for Government of India 
sponsored opportunities such as the BOYSCAST Fellowship and the Indo -US Science 
and Technology Fellowship. Such opportunities require that the Institute cover the entire 
salary during the period of fellowship. Faculty under this category would be required to 
serve the Institute f or a period of three years upon return and will sign a bond to that 
effect. Their salary for the leave period would be paid in thirty six monthly installments 
after they rejoin the Institute. If the concerned faculty is being supported through 
donations ra ised by the Institute, the same arrangement will hold.  
 
(v) In case the concerned faculty member has not yet cleared probation, the leave period 
will not count towards probation period. His/her interrupted probation period will be 
resumed upon return.  
 
The a bove arrangement will be reviewed periodically (at an interval of not more than two 
years) and suitably modified in light of the experience gained.  
 
  
Research and Development Advisory 06(Version 2.0, January 2013)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
SUMMER RESEARCH OPPORTUNITY FOR FACULTY OF OTHER 
ENGINEERING INSTITUTIONS  
As recommended by the Senate in its 4th meeting held on 2nd December 2010, and approved by 
the Board of Governors in its 3rd meeting held  on 7th January 2011 , it was decided  that research 
opportunities must be provided during summer vacation to the faculty of other engineering 
institutions. T he followin g terms and conditions were approved . 
1. This Fellowship of IIT Gandhinagar will be available to Faculty of Engineering Institutions 
for a period of at least two months during the summer vacation.  
2. The eligibility requirements will be  as follow:  
a. The applicant should have completed his/her Ph.D. programme or should be 
interested in serious  research . 
b. He/she should have teaching experience for a period of two years or more . 
c. He/she is currently a full -time faculty member in an engineering college / 
university.  
d. His/her application for availing the fellowship must be received through his/her 
employer.  
e. There should be a strong interest by an IIT Gandhinagar faculty to work with and 
mentor the concerned teacher.  
3. Fellowship Awardees will be required to work with a faculty of IIT Gandhinagar. They will 
be required to maintain a regular work record , and, submit a report to the Institute at the 
end of the fellowship tenure.  
4. Fellowship Awardees may return to IIT Gandhinagar, during two additional vacation 
periods - subject to satisfactory  contributions and on recommendations of the faculty 
mentor at I ITGN . Thus the fellowship once awarded will be valid for three spells, subject 
to satisfactory participation and contribution.  
5. It is expected that a faculty member of IITGN will mentor not more than two teachers 
under this scheme in a year.  Hence, the Inst itute may budget for the number of 
fellowships in a year to be approximately equal to half of the faculty strength.  
6. Proposals where the concerned IIT Gandhinagar faculty member is able to cover partly 
or fully the costs associated with the Fellowship throu gh sponsored projects may be 
preferred.  
7. The fellowship will provide financial support in terms of:  
a. A monthly honorarium of Rs. 20000/ - (Rupees twenty thousand only) to the 
teacher.  
b. Return Rail Travel by 2nd AC sleeper class between Ahmedabad and his/her 
place of work for joining and returning to parent Institution. In some instances, 
air travel by low cost fare may be allowed at the discretion of the Institute.   
Research and Development Advisory 06(Version 2.0, January 2013)  Page 2 
 c. In deserving case, one additional return travel allocation to return to his/her 
normal place of  work/residence, to facilitate attention to urgent official/personal 
matters may be granted.  
8. Fellowship Awardees would be provided free single furnished accommodation in the 
Institute’s guest house / guest apartments; they will be required to pay for their  boarding.  
9. While the proposal has been developed keeping in mind the needs of engineering 
colleges, wherever considered appropriate, the Institute may award such a fellowship to 
teachers of other colleges / universities as well.  
10. The scheme will be reviewed and modified as appropriate,in the light of feedback.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 General  Administration Advisory 17 (Version 1.0, January 201 7) Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
AWARDS AND PRIZES FOR  
CAMPUS DEVELOPMENT RELATED ACTIVITIES  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 20th meeting held on 05 December 201 6) 
 
The Institute received Rs.1.00 lakh towards HUDCO Award for “Best  Practices to Improve 
the Living Environment 2013 -14” and Rs.4.00 lakhs towards HUDCO Design Awards 2015 
for “Cost Effective Rural/ Urban Housing Including Disaster Resistant Housing”. This total 
amount of Rs.5.00 lakhs has been parked in the Endowment Fun ds. The amount enables 
the Institute to spend of about Rs.25,000/ - per annum (@ 5% of corpus).  
 
The Board in its 20th meeting held on 05 December 2016 approved that the Institute may 
contribute an equal amount of Rupees 25,000/ - per year and the total amou nt of Rupees 
50,000/ - every year be used for recognizing and appreciating the ideas and activities 
performed by members of the IITGN community (students, faculty, staff and other 
outsourced workers, consultants) towards better development and management of  the 
IITGN permanent campus through prizes and awards.  
 
A Committee constituted by the Director will invite nominations from the entire IITGN 
community. Recommendations of this Committee will be considered and approved by the 
Director.  
 Academic Affairs Advisory 45 (Version 1.0, January 201 9)  Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR FEES PAYMENT  BY STUDENTS  
(As approved by the BoG in its 25th meeting held on 03 December 2018) 
 
The Board of Governors in its 25th meeting held on 03 December 2018 approved 
following norms for payment of fees.  
 
 
1. Deadline: The deadline for payment of all applicable fees for a particular 
semester will be 15 days before the registration  date of that semester. All 
students already enrol led at the Institute must pay the fees by this deadline. New 
students must pay their fees by the date mentioned in the offer letter.  
 
2. Late Payment Penalty: Failure to pay the fees by the specified deadline will result 
in a penalty of 1% of the fees  (but a minimum of Rs.500/ -) that is overdue. 
Further, if a student fails to pay the fees due within 30 days of the registration 
date for that semester, his/her registration for that semester may be cancelled.   
 
3. Extension of Deadline: Extension of the fee payment deadline may be permitted 
on a case -to-case basis. In case a student requires additional time for fee 
payment, he/she may submit a detailed explanation to the Academic Office by 
the fee payment deadline. The Dean, Academic Affairs, upon careful review, may  
permit such an extension.  
 
4. Financial Assistance: A student requiring financial assistance of any kind for fee 
payment from the Institute must approach the Student Affairs office and do the 
necessary paperwork well ahead of the specified deadline. In case of loans taken 
from outside the Institute, students must again ensure that the paperwork is done 
well in time, and the fees are deposited by the specified deadline.  
 
5. Semester Leave: In case a student applies for semester leave before the date of 
registration of a semester, he/she will not be required to pay fees for that 
semester. In case a student has already paid the fees, they will be fully refunded. 
However, if a student applies for semester leave on or after the date of 
registration, the Inst itute fees will neither be refunded nor adjusted towards a 
subsequent semester. However, the hostel and mess fees may be refunded on a 
pro-rated basis upon the student’s request to the Student Affairs office.  
 
6. Withdrawal from Program: In case a student wit hdraws from his/her program on 
or after the day of registration, the Institute fees will not be refunded. However, 
the hostel and mess fees may be refunded on a pro -rated basis upon the 
student’s request to the Student Affairs office.  Academic Affairs Advisory (Version 1.0, August 2020 Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR CERTIFICATION IN SCIENTIFIC WRITING  
 
(As approved by the Senate  in its 44th meeting held on 08 July  2020 ) 
 
Exceptional research programs all over the world have integrated training and 
certification in scientific writing in their institutional framework. A significant number of 
Master’s and Doctoral students at the Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar 
(IITGN) have limited experience in communicating research. In most cases, the first 
conference poster or journal paper that emerges from a research scholar’s work at 
IITGN is also their first successful scientific communication.  
This certification in Scientific Writing is expected to:  
• Encourage research scholars to work on scientific writing from an 
early stage in their tenure  
• Serve as a milestone for measuring student progress  
• Facilitate emergence of tutors in scientific writing  
• Contribute to skill building of IITGN students  
• Enable students to use scientific writing competencies during their 
life-long learning process.  
Certification in Scientific Writing is not a training program. Its main goals are to gauge 
students' skills and knowledge in scientific writing  and to promote skill development.  
The following norms are approved  for the process:  
(1) Doctoral students are eligible to apply for the certification. The certification is 
especially relevant for scholars who are planning to present their research in 
international conferences abroad or are drafting their first communique. IITGN 
students c an obtain certification at no cost .  
(2) The certification process will be conducted twice every year to ensure a 
manageable number of applicants in each round; suggested timings are during Jan -
Mar and Aug -Oct. 
(3) Applicants will be required to undergo two phases :  
 
 Phase I : Submission of two (2) written works : 1) a poster (mandatory)  and 
2) a scientific article of their work (e.g., a manuscript or a proposal). Both 
written submissions should be the students’ original works without any 
revisions done by their faculty advisors.  To assess the students' written works, Academic Affairs Advisory (Version 1.0, August 2020 Page 2 
 faculty in their respective disciplines and their research advisors may be 
involved. Written submissions will be assessed on the basis of logical 
coherence, ability to convey complex ideas, gra mmar, and language skills. 
Computer -based plagiarism checking systems will be employed during 
grading.  
 Phase II : Undertake a written examination  that will test the applicant’s 
awareness of the principles of scientific writing (e.g., clarity, preciseness, 
coherence, and logical order), information paraphrasing, quotation and 
summarization, academic integrity and ethics, plagiarism, make an argument 
and structure of ac ademic works. It will also test their ability to visualize and 
interpret data.  
(4) The Institute Library and the Writing Studio are expected to provide resources and 
support in training applicants on the various aspects of Scientific Writing, including 
but not limited to on -campus workshops and training sessions, access to journal 
articles, webpages, and videos, and access to visiting resource personnel. A 
database with content on the different topics of Scientific Writing should be created. 
For example, a  dedicated website on Scientific Writing can be created to pool content 
from different resources.  
(5) Phase I assessment of written submissions  will follow a grading matrix that 
reviews multiple parameters. The grading matrix is as follows:  
Assessment  Grad e Sample Parameters  
Good (fulfills certification 
expectations and exceeds 
in certain aspects)  3 • Context and purpose are conveyed clearly  
• Reaches out to audience to a reasonable 
extent  
• Logical and clean organization  
• Perfect or nearly perfect grammar, spelling 
and punctuation.  
• Vocabulary usage is good  
Certifiable (fulfills 
certification expectations)  2 • Adequately covers context but does not 
anticipate audience needs  
• Develops subject material well  
• Overall organization is logical with scope of 
improvement  
• Vocabulary is adequate with scope for 
improvement  
• Minor issues with grammar and/or 
punctuation  Academic Affairs Advisory (Version 1.0, August 2020 Page 3 
 Inadequate (may fulfill 
certain parameters; overall 
falls short of certification 
expectations: requires 
significant work to reach 
certification expectations)  1 • Purpose is not readily apparent though some 
context is provided  
• Unable to reach out to the expected 
audience  
• Superficial treatment of subject matter  
• Organization is weak; transitions are weak 
and often illogical  
• Significant problems with grammar, spelling 
and punctuation; adherence to standard 
scientific norms is not consistent  
(6) Candidates will be required to achieve an overall Grade of 2 (Certifiable) or better 
in their written submissions (Phase I) to be permitted to appear for the written 
examination (Phase II).  
(7) Phase II assessment of the written examination  will follo w a grading matrix that 
reviews multiple parameters. The grading matrix is as follows:  
Assessment  Grade  Sample Parameters  
Good (fulfills certification 
expectations and exceeds 
in certain aspects)  3 • Logical and clean organization  
• Perfect or nearly perfect grammar, spelling 
and punctuation  
• Vocabulary usage is good  
• Good knowledge and skills about concepts in 
scientific writing  
Certifiable (fulfills 
certification expectations)  2 • Overall organization is logical with scope of 
improvement  
• Vocabulary is adequate with scope for 
improvement  
• Minor issues with grammar and/or 
punctuation  
• Satisfactory knowledge and skills about 
concepts in scientific writing  
Inadequate (may fulfill 
certain parameters; overall 
falls short of certification 
expectations)  1 • Superficial treatment of subject matter  
• Organization is weak; transitions are weak 
and often illogical  
• Significant problems with grammar, spelling 
and punctuation; adherence to standard 
scientific norms is not consistent  
• Deficient knowledge and skills about 
concepts in scientific writing  Academic Affairs Advisory (Version 1.0, August 2020 Page 4 
 (8) Participants who perform satisfactorily (Grade 2 and above) in both Phase I and 
Phase II will be awarded the certification. Students who achieve certification have 
been identified as having the basic necessary knowledge and skills in Scientific 
Writing with scope for improvement.  
 
(9) The certification process shall be managed by a Coordinator who will decide on 
the following aspects of the process:  
 
a) Announcement of the process.  
b) Identification of and coordination with faculty and staff who will assist in the 
implementation and assessment of written submissions and examinations.  
c) Coordination with the Institute Library and the Writing Studio on available 
resource materials.  
d) Suggest ion of remedial measures to the participants who are unable to 
pass the certification process and may or may not be interested in 
appearing again.  
 
(10)  Financial support given to Ph.D. students for 1) overseas conferences (up to Rs. 
2 lakh) and 2) doing research in a foreign lab (up to $12500) will be  contingent on 
students clearing the scientific writing certification. In exceptional cases, this 
requirement may be waived if a student cannot obtain the certification but can 
demonstrate enough evidence of having made an attempt to learn and improve 
his/her scientific writing capabilities. Waivers may be given by the  Director upon 
recommendation of the Dean, Academic Affairs.   Student Affairs Advisory 0 5 (March 2020)  Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
STUDENT AFFAIRS  
 
HONOUR CODE OF THE STUDENTS  
 
(As approved by the Joint Student Senate meeting 2013)  
 
 
Honour Code is a set of values which is expected to be followed by IIT Gandhinagar students. It 
is not a set of rules dictated by the Institute. It’s a way of life, created, governed and respected by 
the students. The Honour Code is based on the simple premise that, people will do the right thing 
under all circumstances.  The students affirm to uphold the highest principles of honesty and 
integrity in all their endeavors and foster an atmosphere of mutual respect. The students  will not 
take undue advantage of another individual of the IITGN community , be personally and 
academically honest and treat others with resp ect and courtesy  and neither give nor receive 
unauthorized aid explicitly, but be responsible and speak out ag ainst any unjust practice . 
 
Violation of the Honour Code  
 
Some of the examples of conduct that might be regarded as being in violation of the Hono ur 
Code include:  
 Unauthorized Access: Possessing, using, or exchanging improperly, acquired written or 
verbal information for completing any assignment or during any examination.  
 Unauthorized Collaboration: Unauthorized interaction with another Student or  Students 
for the fulfillment of academic requirements.  
 Plagiarism: Submission of material that is wholly or substantially identical to that created 
or published by another person or persons, without adequate credit notations indicating 
the authorship.  
 Forgery: Forgery, alteration or misuse of any Institute document relating to the academic 
status of the student, for e.g. -resume - paddings, false sickness certificates.  
 Physical, verbal and emotional abuse, bullying ragging, indecent conduct, harassing etc.  
 Indecent commenting or sharing on/against any student, staff, faculty on any public 
forum on the internet or elsewhere.  
 False claims: half -truth/unjust claiming credit.  
 Acting in a manner aimed at eliminating competition, for e.g.by wrong and motivated 
inputs etc.  
 Unauthorized use of facilities and stealing.  
 Any aid to the violation of the honour code.  
 
Instances mentioned above are just meant to provide an idea as to what might be considered a 
violation of the Honour Code. By no means is it a comprehensive  list.  
 Penalties for Violating the Honour Code  
 
Any violation of the Honour Code may invite disciplinary actions. Some examples of penalties 
for violation of the Honour code are:  
 
 
 Expulsion/Suspension from Institute, hostel and Student Activities  
 Immedi ate Suspension from the hostel  
 Monetary fine  
 Denial of service of the Student Placement Office  
 Denial of Institute scholarships/awards/medals  
 
These penalties are indicative. However, any disciplinary committee would make 
recommendations considering each i nstances of violation individually.  Faculty Affairs Advisory 08 (Version 1.0, July 2012 ) Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
FACULTY DEVELOPMENT PLAN OF THE INSTITUTE  
 
(As approved by Board of Governors  in its first meeting held on 18th December 2009)  
 
Faculty is the backbone of any academic institute. Faculty helps students acquire  knowledge in 
their specific subjects as well as develop innovative approaches to issues of  practical 
importance through class -room teaching and out -of-the-class discussions. Faculty  creates 
knowledge through research and, in the process trains graduate stude nts (sometimes 
undergraduate students as well) in research and development activities.  Character of the 
institute is defined and determined by the quality of its graduates when they  go out in the field. It 
is a gradual process with critical inputs from the  faculty. To shape the  envisioned future of 
IITGN, it is critical to recruit and retain outstanding faculty and continue  obtaining their top 
performance during their stay.  
 
Well established institutes attract faculty commensurate with their name and track record.  Some 
of the factors that attract the best faculty candidates are the quality of students,  laboratories and 
research facilities, strength of Masters and Doctoral programmes,  excellence in certain 
academic areas, potential for recognition of good wor k through financial  
and other incentives, and the quality of existing faculty and researchers. Academic and  other 
freedom is always expected in academic institutes.  
 
IITGN has yet to establish its traditions and credentials. However, IITGN carries the name  of 
an IIT and is expected to provide excellence at the level of older IITs and beyond. Our  
admission process assures an outstanding quality of undergraduate students who are envy  
of any institute in the world. Financial backing of the Government of India assures speedy  
development of laboratories and infrastructure. Academic freedom to faculty members in  
pursuing and growing their envisioned areas can be guaranteed. We should not and cannot  
afford to compromise on the quality of faculty at this stage under  the exigency of teaching  
classes. A lower quality faculty will not only adversely affect our pursuit of excellence during  
their (sometimes long) stay, but also hamper our ability to attract good quality faculty in the  
future. We have to approach our recru itment process by highlighting our strengths and  coming 
up with novel schemes to overcome our limitations being a new institute.   
 
In view of our commitment to excellence, the followings actions are proposed for the short  term 
or are already being undertak en towards faculty recruitment, retention and  development . This 
document will be periodically updated and will guide us in all faculty  matters.  
 
1. Communication: Communication and publicity is the key to attract faculty. We have  to reach 
the potential fac ulty candidates in as large a number as possible and  encourage them to 
consider making a career at our institute. With this in view, the  Institute has been focusing on 
its web site, has initiated a quarterly newsletter  (~3000 copies being mailed; including  to all 
faculty members of all IITs), is in the  process of developing strong mailing lists of top 
academics and industrialists, and  has been successfully seeking regular press coverage. On 
his two trips to US, the  Director visited several universities (Sta nford, Caltech, University of 
California Los  Angeles, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, Northwestern University, 
and State  University of New York Buffalo) where he met and addressed Indian graduate and  
post-doctoral students and elaborated on the ad vantages of joining IITGN. This has  resulted 
in some of them applying for faculty positions to our Institute.   Faculty Affairs Advisory 08 (Version 1.0, July 2012 ) Page 2 
  
2. Recognition and Financial Incentives: As an additional means of attracting  outstanding 
faculty, provision should be made for recognition and financial incentive.  At most of the 
renowned institutes, including several older IITs, accomplishments of  faculty members are 
often recognized by offering them prestigious “Chaired”  positions. We must create similar 
“Chaired” positions at IITGN. These “Cha ired” positions will also carry additional honorarium 
over and above the Govt -mandated  salary. At IITGN, there is also a need to create Research 
Fellowships for  outstanding young faculty on the lines similar to the “Chaired” positions for  
established facul ty members. These fellowships will not only provide recognition and  financial 
incentives but also accelerate their professional growth. Additional funds for  the honoraria 
have to be raised from private donations and endowments.  
 
3. Recruitment Quality: A good faculty candidate would like to go to a place having a  better 
quality of existing faculty. In the long term interest of the Institute, we intend to  not only be 
quite careful in ensuring the quality of faculty we hire, but also be strict in  clearing the  
probation of faculty members currently on its rolls. In fact, we should  seriously consider 
increasing the probation period of regular faculty to two years  unlike the general practice in 
the IIT system for one -year probation which is not  always sufficient to judge true potential or 
weakness of a young colleague.  
 
4. Recruitment Process and Strategy: In July 2009, faculty recruitment process was  moved to 
IITGN and ~650 applications received since are currently being processed.  Since IITGN does 
not have domai n expertise in many areas, a 2 -tier short -listing  process has been developed 
(and documented) to utilize the expertise of senior  colleagues at IIT Bombay and elsewhere. 
While efforts are being made to quickly  complete this round of selections, so as not to  lose 
exceptionally good candidates  contract appointments through “standing committee” will be 
offered where  appropriate without waiting for selection committee meeting. Efforts are also 
being  made to bring some mid -career distinguished faculty to IITGN. C onsidering that  group 
research is critical to making an impact in a discipline, we may also make  several offers 
simultaneously in a research area in order to create viable a group.  
 
5. Recruitment Strategy in “Other” Disciplines: Currently, IITGN has acade mic programmes 
in a few disciplines only, but it will eventually start several other   disciplines such as 
Computer Science and Engineering, Civil Engineering,  Metallurgical Engineering, 
Biosciences and Bioengineering, etc. IITGN Academic  Council has decide d to start recruiting 
faculty and simultaneously start Doctoral  programmes in all these areas, so that faculty 
members can initially start their  research work through Doctoral students and develop 
laboratories and other  research facilities. As faculty grow s in a discipline, Masters and 
Bachelors  programmes will be started in a phased manner and in that sequence. Therefore, 
the Institute will initially focus on research -oriented faculty recruitment and thus be able  to 
develop faculty in these areas over a lo nger time period. This plan is now in place  and the 
Institute is currently processing faculty applications in all such areas.   
 
6. Visiting Professors: IIT GN intends to be liberal in bringing short -term faculty  members to 
help run the Institute, both for teaching and developing the laboratories,  as well as for 
institution building. This is important to provide quality teaching to our  students, and in 
mentoring of our younger faculty. Two approaches are being taken  in the Institute towards 
achieving this.   
 
a. Efforts are being made to bring mid -career faculty members from other  academic 
institutions in the country. Already, IIT Bombay has been  contributing towards this by Faculty Affairs Advisory 08 (Version 1.0, July 2012 ) Page 3 
 sending their faculty members for a semester,  and in one case for a longer duration 
(Prof  Yajnik has been with us since July  2008 ). We were also able to get Prof Dhiren 
Patel of Computer Science  Department at NIT Surat to join us as Visiting Professor for 
a year starting in  July 2009.  
 
b. Efforts are also being made to bring superannuated facu lty members of IITs  and other 
good institutions. We have received a fair amount of success in this  regard and several 
such professors who retired from IITB have joined us, one  retired professor of IIT Kanpur 
(currently settled in US) will join us shortly, and we are in discussions with some others.   
 
7. Pioneer Leadership Programme: Board of Governors of IIT Bombay had earlier decided 
liberal terms for IITB faculty assisting the setting up of IITGN. In addition to their full salary, 
additional allowance of 50% of basic pay, furnished rent -free accommodation at IITGN, and 
air fare for travel once a month between Mumbai and Gandhinagar are provided. This 
provision has been very beneficial to IITGN programmes in utilizing services of experienced 
IITB faculty me mbers. In order to attract mid -career faculty members of other Institutions in 
the country to move to IITGN for a limited period ranging from a semester to several years, 
Chairman of the Board of Governors has already approved a proposal to offer condition s 
similar to those offered to IITB faculty. However, additional cash allowance paid to faculty 
other than that from IIT Bombay has to be charged to the donations and endowment.  Efforts 
are now being made to raise the requisite money.  
 
8. Research Proposals : Research work carried out by faculty members distinguishes IITs from 
other engineering colleges. Besides publicity through publication of research papers and 
training research students, research activities improve quality of teaching, help develop 
labora tories and other facilities. Therefore, IITGN supports the research of its faculty 
members within its limited means. However, the Institute strongly encourages its faculty 
members to obtain additional research funds from outside agencies, and will provide all 
support to faculty members in developing and submitting research proposals to various 
funding agencies. Sponsored research projects afford greater flexibility and freedom to 
faculty members in their research activities, provides peer review comments on  their ideas, 
and helps them gain visibility at national and international levels.  
 
9. Research Space: Our current location places a significant limitation on the research  space 
we can provide to our faculty. While we are making an optimal use of the  space  available, we 
need to go beyond. Two options are being considered: a)  Renting a floor of a commercial 
building near the campus with an area of about 500  sq m, and b) Construction of about 1,000 
sq m of pre -engineered workshop -type shed within the VGEC Cam pus at the cost of IITGN, 
which can be subdivided into  smaller units and allocated for various purposes.  
 
10. International Travel Support: Participation in international conferences and  meetings is an 
important avenue for professional growth of faculty me mbers,  particularly for keeping pace 
with research being done at other places and futuristic  trends. Therefore, we should 
encourage faculty members to participate in  international conferences and provide travel and 
other support for the same. IITGN  can pro vide limited funds for international travel through 
the MHRD grants. Faculty  members can approach other agencies like DST for international 
travel support. We  must also make efforts to raise private funds for international travel and 
other  activities that encourage and support our pursuit of excellence. Several older IITs  are 
already doing so.  
 Faculty Affairs Advisory 08 (Version 1.0, July 2012 ) Page 4 
 11. International Exposure: IITGN must encourage its faculty members to gain working  
experience in international environment. Those of our faculty members who have  spent less 
than six months carrying out studies or research in a technologically  advanced country will be 
encouraged to seek one -year international experience.  They will be encouraged to apply for 
the fellowships available through Govt. of India,  such as th e BOYSCAST Fellowship and the 
Indo-US Science and Technology  Fellowship, or seek funding opportunities from some 
university or research  organization overseas. In some cases, we may even utilize our own 
resources  through the MHRD grants/private donations to  facilitate them obtain such an  
experience. We may also need to be liberal and make exceptions in granting leave of  
absence to the faculty for this purpose. It is best if they obtain such experience early  in their 
career before they are deeply involved wit h their PhD students and other  research projects.  
 
12. Summer Industrial Experience: Many younger faculty colleagues will benefit from  working 
with design and development unit of an industry during the summer months.  This can be a 
very useful experience fo r a faculty member in obtaining industrial  perspective and to fine 
tune his teaching and research. IITGN will encourage such  engagements by formally 
approaching the concerned industries on behalf of  interested faculty members and where 
appropriate will ext end required administrative  and financial support.  
 
13. Masters Programmes: Masters programmes (MTech in engineering disciplines and  MSc in 
sciences) enable faculty members to develop and teach post -graduate  courses in their areas 
of expertise, and carry o ut research through Masters projects.  Many of our Masters students 
may stay on for a doctoral degree, and hence, provide  better research scholars to our faculty 
members. Therefore, Masters programmes  are extremely beneficial for professional 
development an d growth of faculty  members. With this in mind, IITGN intends to start 
Masters programmes as soon as  it is in a position to do so, with respect to its faculty strength 
in different disciplines.   
 
14. Joint Doctorate with Academics from Elsewhere : Consideri ng our initial  limitations in 
terms of research laboratories, IITGN is encouraging its faculty  members to undertake PhD 
supervision jointly with academics elsewhere who may  have strong research infrastructure.  
 
15. Engagement of Senior External Academics: IITGN will engage distinguished  academics 
from around the country and overseas who will advise, guide and mentor  the faculty. Already, 
Professor S P Sukhatme (former Director, IIT Bombay) and Prof  J B Joshi (former Director, 
Institute of Chemical Technolog y, Mumbai) are engaged  with us as Distinguished Honorary 
Professors. Institute has also set up an “Academic  Consultative Group” for Chemical 
Engineering as a facilitation initiative for the benefit  of our young faculty. Several more 
Advisory Committees wil l be formed both at the  Department/Discipline and the Institute levels 
wherein the committee members will  advise and guide the Institute and take the ownership of 
its short -term targets. The  Institute intends to have fairly liberal budget on this head, to 
enable attractive terms  and monetary compensation to such advisory committee members.   
 
16. International Partnerships: IITGN has benefitted enormously with the special  relationship it 
shares with IIT Bombay. It now plans to forge strong relationships with  several willing and 
enthusiastic universities worldwide with whom we would have  active exchanges of faculty 
and students, and undertake joint projects. The Provost  and Executive Vice President of 
SUNY Buffalo Professor Satish Tripathi will visit  IITGN in December 2009 and several other 
senior academics from US universities  have visited us in recent months or are scheduled to 
visit us shortly to discuss mutual  collaborations and activities, e.g., Prof Nitish Thakor of 
Johns Hopkins, Prof Pratim  Biswas of Un iversity of Washington St Louis, and Prof Kishore Faculty Affairs Advisory 08 (Version 1.0, July 2012 ) Page 5 
 Trivedi of Duke  University. Besides the US, IITGN will also develop similar relationships with 
some  European and Indian universities / research centres.  
 
17. Periodic Assessment and Feedback System : IITGN h as now initiated a system  wherein all 
faculty members fill up a self –assessment form at the end of an academic  year. This will 
enable the Institute to evaluate the effectiveness of its faculty, and  undertake any mid -course 
corrections in its policies on fa culty matters. Further, it will  enable the Institute to provide 
constructive feedback to the concerned faculty. On the  part of faculty, this system will keep 
them aware of their own performance and  output. Institute has also set up a system for 
quarterly r eport from younger faculty  who are either on probation or on contact.  Academic Affairs Advisory 38 (Version 2.0, March 2024)                                         Page 1 of 2  INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR NORMS FOR DUAL MAJOR BTECH PROGRAMME  (As approved by BoG in its 18th meeting held on 16th May 2016 and  the Senate in its 68th meeting held on 27 Feb 2024)  1. Introduction  This provision is to enable students enrolled in the B.Tech. programme at IIT Gandhinagar to complete a second major in a discipline of their interest other than the parent discipline.   2. Eligibility and Approval Process   § B. Tech. students who joined IIT Gandhinagar in 2014 or later may apply for a second major any time after completion of three semesters.  § The students are free to opt for any discipline in which B.Tech. is offered at IIT Gandhinagar.  § The students will submit an application with recommendations of both disciplines to the Dean, Academic Affairs for final approval by the Chairman, Senate.  § The number of students approved for second major in a discipline may not exceed by 10 seats or 20% of the sanctioned strength of that discipline whichever is higher.  § Permission for dual major shall be in the order of merit determined by the students’ CPI. Only those students with CPI greater than or equal to 6.50 and without fail grade (F or E) in any non-zero credit course will be eligible to apply. The CPI comparison will be within a batch.  § This provision is extended to the students who entered B.Tech. in 2013 with one-time exception to apply for it before the end of sixth semester.   3. Graduation Requirements (applicable for students admitted before AY 2022-23)  (a) Students enrolled in the dual major programme will have to complete all the core courses as defined by the secondary discipline in addition to the minimum credit requirements of their primary discipline. (b) Discipline-specific core courses that are common to major in the two disciplines need not be repeated. (c) The scheduling of courses will be up to the students and not the responsibility of the institute.  (d) The requirement of open elective courses will reduce by 4 credits in case of double major.  (e) The credit requirements must be completed in maximum of 12 semesters  (f) The criteria for Guided Progress Scheme and Termination of Programme will be the same as prescribed for the students perusing single major. The provision of Pass/Fail option will also remain unchanged (without additional benefits).  (g) All other norms for the B.Tech. programme will be applicable.  Academic Affairs Advisory 38 (Version 2.0, March 2024)                                         Page 2 of 2   4. Graduation Requirements (applicable for students admitted from AY 2022-23 onwards)  (a) Students enrolled in the dual major programme will have to complete all the core courses as defined by the secondary discipline in addition to the minimum credit requirements of their primary discipline. (b) Discipline-specific core courses that are common to major in the two disciplines need not be repeated. (c) Notwithstanding points 4(a) and 4(b) above, students must complete at least 28 credits of courses from the secondary discipline, in addition to core courses common to both the disciplines. This requirement is in addition to the credit requirements for major in the primary discipline.   (d) The scheduling of courses will be up to the students and not the responsibility of the institute.  (e) The requirement of open elective courses will reduce by 4 credits in case of double major.  (f) The credit requirements must be completed in maximum of 12 semesters  (g) The criteria for Guided Progress Scheme and Termination of Programme will be the same as prescribed for the students perusing single major. The provision of Pass/Fail option will also remain unchanged (without additional benefits).  (h) All other norms for the B.Tech. programme will be applicable.  For example, consider the case where 42 credits of core courses are prescribed for major in a secondary discipline. A student who opts for dual major in this secondary discipline with 20 credits of common core courses with the primary discipline, will have to register for 28 credits of courses from the secondary discipline in addition to the common core courses of 20 credits and credit requirements for major in the primary discipline. Please note that core courses of the secondary discipline cannot be counted towards the elective/open elective requirements for major in the primary discipline.  5. Award of Degree  The student will be awarded B.Tech. degree mentioning both majors after successfully completing all the requirements. The name of admitting discipline will be mentioned first and the discipline of second major will follow.   6. Exit Options  The student may request to opt out of the dual major programme at any point during the programme after giving valid reasons, and if the request is approved, the student will be treated as in the B.Tech. programme with major in parent discipline.  General Administration  Advisory 27 (Version 1.0, December 2021)                     Page 1 of 2 
 
 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAG AR 
 
MEDICAL FACILITIES T O  THE EMPLOYEES OF IIT GANDHINAGAR  
(As approved by the BOG in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 2021)  
 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 33rd meeting held on 15 November 
2021 approved the following norms for medical facilities  (with effect from 01 January 
2022)  for employees of the Institute on pay -scale : 
 
1) All such employees will pay a monthly contribution to the Institute as per 
following rate s: 
Pay Levels in the Pay Matrix  Contribution (Rs. per month)  
Level 1 to 5  250 
Level 6  450 
Level 7 to 11  650 
Level 12 and above  1,000  
 
2) Facilities /Benefits for employees on pay -scale :   
(a) These employees, their spouse and dependent children (dependent 
children as defined by the Central Government for medical benefit 
purposes) may visit the IITGN Medical Centre to avail medical facilities . 
They will be eligible for free consultation and medicines . 
(b) Expenditure incurred on specialist consultation, patholog y/ radiology tests, 
medicines purchased from market, etc ., will be reimbursed provided such 
consultations /tests are undertaken on recommendations of an IITGN 
Medical Consultant . This will, however, not include reimbursement of cost 
of cosmetic surgeries, c ost of spectacles or hearing aids, and treatment of 
infertility . 
(c) The reimbursement of expenditure on dental and eye treatments will be 
capped at 1.75 times the rates prescribed by CGHS. In case CGHS rates 
are not available, AIIMS (New Delhi) rates will be applicable.  Similarly, 
reimbursement on some other treatments may be restricted to certain 
limits on recommendation of the Medical Advisory Committee of the 
Institute .  
(d) The Medical Consultants of the Institute may refer the patients to an 
empaneled hospita l for in -patient treatment and all reasonable expenses 
will be borne by the Institute . The admissible bed charges for different 
levels of employees on pay -scale will be as under : 
Pay Levels in the Pay Matrix  Maximum admissible bed charges  
per day (in Rs.)  
Level 1 to 5  3,000  
Level 6  4,500  
Level 7 to 11  6,000  
Level 12 and above  7,500  
 
(e) In case the employee or his /her spouse and dependent children seeks 
treatment in any private hospital other than hospitals empaneled by the 
Institute, the amount of reimbursement for bed charges will be restricted to 
the limit mentioned at (d)  above and other expenditure such as surgery, 
medicines, lab reports, etc ., will be restricted to 80 % of actual expenditure . General Administration  Advisory 27 (Version 1.0, December 2021)                     Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 However, if treatment is sought at a government or ch aritable hospital, full 
reimbursement may be considered. In all cases, prior recommendation of 
the IITGN Medical Consultant will be needed.  
(f) In certain cases, “package deals” may be available for treatment without a 
detailed breakup of the expenditure. In  such cases, reimbursement will be 
restricted to 1.75 times the CGHS rate or full reimbursement (whichever is 
lower) if that treatment is soug ht in empaneled/government/charitable 
hospitals. For other hospitals  (other than empaneled/ government/ 
charitable), the reimbursement will be restricted to 1.25 times the CGHS 
rate or full reimbursement (whichever is lower). In case CGHS rates are 
not ava ilable, AIIMS (New Delhi) rates will apply in place of CGHS rates . 
 
3) Parents of employees on pay -scale may seek medical consultation at the IITGN 
Medical Centre free of cost. They may also avail medicines, physiotherapy and 
other facilities available at the  Medical Centre without any charge. However, 
they will not be eligible for reimbursement of any external OPD and related 
charges (tests, specialist consultation, etc.) or cost of hospitalization.  
 
4) The monthly contribution and the admissible bed charges may be revised from 
time to time. The Director is authorized to approve such revisions based on the 
recommendations of the Medical Advisory Committee.  
 
5) The above reimbursement norms apply to Allopath ic forms of treatment. 
Individuals wishing to seek reimbursement of alternate forms of treatment (e.g. 
Ayurveda, Homeopathy, etc.) must seek prior approval by providing a detailed 
and complete justification well before the expenditure is incurred. Such 
requests may be considered on a case -by-case basis by the Medical Advisory 
Committee and its recommendation will be considered by the Director for 
approval or otherwise.  
 
6) The above framework  will be effective from 1st January 2022.  
 
7) Any special cases requiring exceptions to the general terms and conditions 
above may be considered for approval (or otherwise) by the Director based on 
the recommendations of the Medical Advisory Committee of the Institute.  
 General Administration Advisory 02 (Version 6.0, November 2022)                                              Page 1 of 2 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 DELEGATION OF FINANCIAL POWERS TO FUNCTIONARIES  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 21st meeting held on 17 March 2017  and  
In its  28th meeting held on 02 January 2020 ) 
 
The Board of Governors of the Institute in its 28th meeting held on 02 January 2020 approved the 
following revised delegation of financial powers to various functionaries of the Institute. This comes 
into force with immediate effect and henceforth requests for purchases or other expenditures 
should be rout ed for approval as per this table.  
 
Authority  Capital Expenditure  
(excluding Limited 
Time Store)  
Rs (Lakh)  Revenue 
Expenditure and 
Limited Time Store  
Rs (Lakh)  Temp 
advance  
Rs 
(Lakh)  Remarks  
Dean/Professor -
In-Charge (GA)  10 10 10  
Dean/Professor -
In-Charge (R&D)  10 10 10 For project and consultancy 
related expenses.  
Other Deans  2.5 0.5 0.5 For expenses related to their 
respective domains.  
Head of the 
Departments 
(HoD)  2.5 0.5 0.5 For expenditure related to 
their Department/ Discipline  
Registrar  2.5 0.5 0.5  
Discipline 
Coordinators 
(DC) / Project 
Investigators (PI)  1 0.25 0.25 For expenses related to 
their respective disciplines/  
For own externally funded 
project related expenses.  
Director  All cases  All cases  All cases   
 
Notes:  
1. The financial/sanctioning powers are subject to the provisions made in the Budget.  
2. The financial/sanctioning powers cannot be delegated further.  
3. Exclusions : Purchase of any furniture (including refrigerator, air conditioner and television), 
travel,  legal matters expenditures and casual labour for urgent work. Director is authorized to 
delegate financial/ sanctioning powers related to these exclusions to various posts/ employees 
as may be deemed suitable from time to time.  
4. Director may delegate finan cial/sanctioning powers to other posts/employees, charged with 
special assignment, equivalent to Deans/HoD/DC/PI as may be deemed suitable by the 
Director from time to time.  
5. In the absence of any of the above officials, the Director may delegate their fina ncial powers to 
any other faculty/ staff as may be deemed suitable.   
 
Delegations for Exclusions:  
The sanctioning authority for the exclusions has been delegated to the officials as per the table 
below but within their financial powers limit : 
 
Sr. 
No Head of 
Expenditure  Account  Officer to hold delegated 
authority  Remarks  
1. Travel  Institute Account  Associate Dean (FR) in 
his/her absence Dean (CD)  To carry out the 
responsibilities, all the 
functionaries are 
hereby delegated the 
sanctioning/ financial 
powers  upto Rs. 2.50 
lakhs for 1 & 2.  a) Faculty  
b) Non -teaching Staff  Registrar  
R&D Account 
(including CPDA,PDA ) Dean  (R&D ) in his/her 
absence Associate Dean (EP)  
2. Furniture  Institute Account  Dean (CD), i n his /her absence  
Associate Dean (CM) General Administration Advisory 02 (Version 6.0, November 2022)                                              Page 2 of 2 Sr. 
No Head of 
Expenditure  Account  Officer to hold delegated 
authority  Remarks  
R&D Account 
(including CPDA,PDA ) Dean  (R&D ) in his/her 
absence Associate Dean (EP)  
3. Legal  Institute Account  PIC (GA)/Registrar  
R&D Account  Dean  (R&D ) 
 
In the absence of any Dean /PIC, the Director may delegate their financial powers to any other 
post/employee as may be deemed suitable by the Director from time to time . 
 
A summary of some other related matters is as under:  
 
CPDA/PDA :  Apart from CPDA ( ref. Advisory No. 13: Faculty Affairs ) there is a scheme of PDA 
(Professional Development Account). The PDA amount comprises 12.5% of the total overhead 
charged from a sponsored research project of the concerned faculty member  and such other 
contributions by the faculty/ Institute . Since both  CPDA and PDA are managed through R&D 
accounts, all cases will require approval of Dean  (R&D).  
 
Internally Funded Projects : All expenditure sanctioning will require approval of the Dean (R&D).  
 
Domestic Travel : All travels out of station, regardless of per sonal or official, should be 
recommended by Head of the Department (Engineering , Natural Sciences , and Humanities and 
Social Sciences  as the case may be). If expenditure is to be charged to projects/CPDA/PDA, a 
prior approval of Dean (R&D), and if it is to  be charged to MoE grants of the Institute, approval of 
Associate Dean ( FR)/ Registrar, as the case may be, is required .  
 
Foreign Travel : All foreign travels (regardless of whether official or personal, and whether or not 
any funds are required from the Institute) must be undertaken only with prior approval of the 
Director. The request for permission must be sent on prescribed proforma well in advance (4 to 6 
weeks) of the starting date of journey.  
 
Leave Travel Concession (LTC): All cases need prior appr oval of the Associate Dean (FR)/ 
Registrar . The request for permission must be submitted on prescribed proforma well in advance 
(4 to 6 weeks) of journey.  
 
Refunds and Waivers: All kinds of refunds (viz. deposits, EMD, etc.) will require approval of            
PIC (GA)/ Registrar while all kind of waivers (viz. penalty, fees, etc.) will require approval of 
Director , as the case may be.  
  
Loan: Soft Advance and Short Term Loan to faculty are to be sanctioned by PIC (GA)  on the 
recommendation of Head of Departments  while that  to staff are to be sanctioned by the Registrar. 
Any other kind of loan will require approval of Director on the recommendation of Professor -In-
Charge (FA)/Registrar.  
 
Imprest : It is self -checking account where a fixed balance is main tained by regular replenishments 
and used for paying small, routine expenses. The imprest for a particular section/unit will be 
sanctioned by the Director in the name of the concerned officer -in-charge and the imprest amount 
will depend upon the needs of t he section/unit . Day to day contingent expenses for items up to the 
value of Rs. 5000/ - at disciplines/section level are to be paid from Imprest only. For recoupment of 
the Imprest, bills/invoices of the expenditure are to be submitted to the Accounts Sect ion. 
Recoupment request typically be made when the Imprest falls below 50% of the sanctioned 
amount.  Acad emic Affairs Advisory 32(Version 1.0, August  2014)                                                                 Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR SUPPORT TO PH.D STUDENTS FOR VISITING THEIR ALMA 
MATER UG AND PG INSTITUTIONS  
 
(As approved by Senate  in its 1 8th meeting held on 3rd January  2014  and 30th meeting held on 
17th April 2018 ) 
 
IITGN has ta ken forceful initiatives to attract and recruit only the best scholars to its PhD programme. 
The institute places special emphasis on the academic background and credentials of its doctoral 
scholars. In an effort to maintain high standards of PhD recruitme nt, the institute intends to develop 
stronger relationships with the alma mater institutions of its current doctoral students. A scheme to 
support the interaction of current doctoral students with their undergraduate or postgraduate 
institutions is hereby proposed. Details and provisions of this scheme are as follows:  
 
1. Current PhD students of the Institution in the Regular category will be encouraged to visit their 
parent undergraduate and/or postgraduate institutions .  
 
2. IITGN will support the to and fro t ravel of doctoral students to their undergraduate and/or 
postgraduate institutions by IInd AC. The institute will also cover hospitality including boarding and 
lodging at their place of visit as per prescribed norms of the institute.  
 
3. Doctoral students wh o are interested in availing of this scheme are required to apply in the 
prescribed format to the Academic Office. The Academic Office will coordinate with the Discipline 
Coordinator of the student's discipline to formalize activities planned during the st udent's visit. 
Student's may be required to make a presentation, interact with current students of their parent 
institutions and engage the faculty of those institutions.  
 
4. The student's visit is expected to enthuse their parent institutions with the cultu re, aspirations and 
achievements of IITGN. Doctoral students who avail of this scheme will be required to submit a 
report in prescribed format to the Academic Office upon completion of their visit. The Academic 
Office may also engage with the institutions visited to collect and compile feedback regarding 
information provided about llTGN.  
 
The proposed scheme of supporting doctoral students of IITGN towards visiting their alma mater 
institutions is an innovative and aggressive effort by the institute to dev elop strong relationships with 
numerous institutions that have and will likely continue to provide a valuable pool of doctoral students.  
 Guideline for conducting a Ph.D. thesis seminar / proposal defense / QE Phase II online 
In view of the COVID-19 situation, a framework for presenting a Ph.D. thesis seminar, defending the 
PhD thesis proposal and conducting Phase II of the Ph.D. qualifying exam remotely is proposed 
below. This is a temporary measure being put in place until these become possible in-person again.   
Announcement: 
A: Pre-synopsis / Thesis Seminar 
1. The supervisor should make a formal announcement of the thesis seminar to DSC members, 
faculty and all Ph.D. students of the institute, and other PG students of the discipline (with a 
copy to: academics@iitgn.ac.in ). The link for participating in the seminar should be shared in 
the announcement email. 
2. There should be a gap of at least 5 days  between the date of the formal announcement and 
the date of the seminar.  
B: Proposal Defense and QE Phase II 
1. The discipline coordinator / supervisor (as is usually practiced in the discipline) should, in 
consultation with the DSC members schedule the online proposal defense / QE Phase II (and 
inform: academics@iitgn.ac.in ). The DSC members and the supervisor may decide if any 
other faculty members or students are to be invited to these sessions.  
2. The link for participation in the meeting should be shared by the supervisor at least 2 days  
before the proposal defense / QE Phase II.  
During the event: 
A: Pre-synopsis / Thesis Seminar 
1. It is to be ensured that there are at least 10 participants in the pre-synopsis seminar (other 
than the student presenting and the DSC members). 
2. The seminar (including Q/A and discussions with the student) is to be recorded and archived.  
 
3. If a committee member’s remote connection fails and they are not able to reconnect, a 
separate interaction session with that member may be scheduled at a later time. If such a 
situation arises, the date and time of the meeting must be intimated to the Associate Dean 
(PG). Any such additional sessions are also to be recorded and archived.  
 
4. The responsibility of sharing the recording with the academic office ( academics@iitgn.ac.in ) 
lies with the supervisor. This exercise must be completed within 3 days of the seminar. 
B: Proposal Defense and QE Phase II 
1. If a committee member’s remote connection fails and they are not able to reconnect, a 
separate interaction session with that member may be scheduled at a later time. 
 
2. Recording of the proposal defense / QE Phase II is not necessary. 
 Academic  Affairs  Advisory  15 (Version  3.0, February  2024) Page  1  INDIAN  INSTITUTE  OF TECHNOLOGY  GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS  ON OVERSEAS  RESEARCH  EXPERIENCE  
FOR  PH.D  STUDENTS  
(As approved  by the Board  of Governors  in its 9th meeting  held on 28th March 2013)  
 
The Institute  is committed  to have  a rigorous  PhD programme  for preparing  outstanding  
academic  leaders  and researchers.  Efforts  are being  made  to attract  the best talent  in the 
country  to join the Institute’s  PhD programme  and to provide  the best possible  learning  
environment  and research  experience  to them.  As part of these  efforts,  it is envisioned  that 
an exposure  to some  of the state -of-the-art research  facilities  and interaction  with prominent  
researchers  overseas  will widen  the perspective  of these  students  and give a tremendous  
boost  to their confidence  level.  It is also imperative  that such  a research  experience  be for a 
significant  duration  so that  the students  can get  some  tangible  outputs  from their  visit 
overseas.  
 
The following  norms  have  been  arrived  at with the above  context  in mind.  It is understood  
that these  norms  will be reviewed  and revised  periodically  to meet  the needs  of changed  
circumstances  as the Institute  grows  and as the experience  is gained  on implementation  of 
this scheme.  
 
1. Full-time PhD students  who have  successfully  completed  their requirements  of 
qualifying  examination  are eligible  for financial  assistance  to go for overseas  
research  experience.  The applicant  is expected  to have  an excellent  academic  
performance  and impeccable  record  of interpersonal  relations.  The student,  with help 
from the supervisor(s),  should  establish  contact  with the overseas  collaborator  to 
layout  the research  objectives  and seek  a written  consent  from the host professor.  
 
2. This scheme  will provide  support  to a student  only once  during  his/her  entire  PhD 
programme  for a duration  of the overseas  visit being  approximately  one semester  (4 
– 6 months).  
 
3. Financial support given to PhD  students for:  
• Overseas conferences (up to Rs. 2 lakh) and  
• Doing research in a foreign lab (up to $12500) will be contingent on students clearing 
the scientific writing certification. In exceptional cases, this requirement may be waived 
if a student cannot obtain the certification but can demonstrate enough evidence of 
having made an attempt to learn and improve his/her scientific writing capabilities. 
Waivers may be given by the Director upon recommendation of the Dean, Academic 
Affairs.  
 
4. This financial  assistance  can support  the expenses  related  to visas,  air travel  
(including  local travel  within  the foreign  country  for attending  any  conferences),  health  
insurance  during  the visit, and a lump -sum maintenance  allowance  to support  
accommodation  and boarding  (food)  expenses.  The lump -sum maintenance  
allowance  payable  to the student  during  the visit will be US$ 500 per week  for US/ 
Canada/  Europe/  Japan/  New Zealand/  Australia  and US$ 300 per week  for the other  
countries. The dates  of travel  will be included  in counting  the number of weeks.  
 Academic  Affairs  Advisory  15 (Version  3.0, February  2024) Page  2  5. The amount  to be provided  by way of financial  support  will be subject  to an overall  
ceiling  of US$ 12,500  per student.  
 
6. A committee  comprising  Dean  (Academic  Affairs),  Dean  (Research  and 
Development),  and Dean  (Student  Affairs)  may consider  applications  
supported/endorsed  by faculty  supervisor(s)  and make  appropriate  recommendations  
to the Director  for approval.  Academic  Affairs  Advisory  15 (Version  3.0, February  2024) Page  3  7. A recipient  of this support  may seek  additional  support  from other  sources  including  
the organization  of intended  visit overseas,  and/or,  meet  a part of the expenditure  
through  personal  finances/loans.  The concerned  faculty  supervisors  may also 
consider  supporting  the students  partially  through  their own projects  or professional  
development  accounts.  
 
8. The student  will be treated  to be on academic  leave  during  such  a visit. Hence,  the 
student  will register  at the Institute  for the semester(s)  and continue  to draw  
scholarship.  Thesis  grade  submission  and other  such  administrative  requirements  
will be taken  care of by the supervisor(s)  based  on the feedback  from the overseas  
professor.  
 
9. In case  a student  decides  to do academic  registration  at the overseas  
university/institute,  he/she  may request  the Institute  for transfer  of credits  in lieu 
thereof.  However,  the Institute  will not pay any fees or charges  to the host 
university/institute.  
 
10. Expenditure  on this scheme  will be covered  from the “Excellence  Funds”  as 
approved  by the Board  of Governors  from time to time,  such  as donations,  interest  
income  of the endowment,  and overheads  and savings  of the projects.  
 
Above  norms  do not necessarily  mean  that the Institute  is committed  to providing  full 
funding  for students.  The Institute  may set a lower  limit for funding  or provide  partial  
financial support on a case  to case  basis.  Research and Development Advisory 13 (Version 1.0, January 201 9)  Page 1 of 1 
 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
DISCIPLINE PROMOTION ACCOUNT  (DPA)  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 25th meeting held on 03 December 2018)  
 
The Institute has been growing in its size of faculty strength and the effort is being 
made to create more local ownership and enable decision making at discipline level. 
To provide more autonomy to disciplines to manage their requirements and 
expenditure, it is necessary that various disciplines start generating their own 
resources through various means possible within the Institute norms.  
 
For the above purpose, the Board has approved creation of ‘Discipline Promotion 
Account’ with acronym as ‘DPA’ for the various disciplines in the office of Dean, 
Research and Development. This account will be operated by the Discipline 
Coordinator as PI and it will follow the proces s of approval as an R&D project. It also 
includes Central Instrumentation Facility (CIF) to have DPA. The Chairman of CIF 
committee will be considered equivalent to Discipline Coordinator, who will act as PI 
of its DPA.  
 
The disciplines are encouraged to contribute to this account through their various 
discipline level activities, such as short -courses, workshops, conferences, consultancy 
project, laboratory usage charges, etc.  
 
The available funds can be used to promote their academic programmes, develop  
and maintain laboratories, support various academic and research activities, 
encourage student activities, provide travel support to students and supporting 
many other such expenses. Individual disciplines can form their own strategy and 
make policies, ov er and above the policies at the Institute level, to generate 
resources and manage expenditure.  
 
Mode of operation  of Discipline Promotion Account  is outlined below:  
 Discipline coordinator will be the PI for this account  and the purchases above 
financial a uthority of PI will need approval of Dean, R&D.  
 Discipline coordinator will maintain records of expenditure and discuss the 
plans and priorities with discipline faculty from time to time.  
 
 
                
 
       Student Affairs Advisory 04 (August 2022 )     Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
STUDENT AFFAIRS  
 “On-Campus Employment Opportunities” Program  at IIT GANDHINAGAR  
 (As approved by the Director in December 2020 and revised in August 2022)  
The “ On-Campus Employment Opportunities (oCEO) ” program aims to provide students with first -
hand employment and job experience. This program will help the students on ‘High -Quality Job 
experience’, ‘Inculcate Higher Responsibility’, ‘Develop Leadership and Life -skills’, ‘Opportunity to 
Earn Money' and  ‘Meet Human Resource Requirements’ of the Institute.  In addition, the students can 
contribute significantly to continuing education programs and various other initiatives of the Institute.  
The program will be open to B.Tech, and all Master Students (MSc , MA, MTech) not receiving any 
stipend. However, Master students (MSc, MA, MTech) receiving stipend may also be considered for 
such employment subject to exemplary performance and discharge of duties expected against the 
payment of their stipend. Students to be engaged in oCEO activities having an academic nature, like  
Teaching Assistant of courses, PAL, and ADH, should have a minimum CPI requirement of 7.0. For 
other activities, there is no minimum CPI requirement.  
The selected students will be allowed to  work for a maximum of 10 hours per week during the semester 
and 40 hours per week during the vacations including mid sem breaks. The remuneration rates will be in 
the range of 150 -200 per hour and most of the students would start at the base rate and pay -hikes will be 
based on the performance and engagement.  
Any students engaged under this activity may like to mention on their CV and may use the reporting 
officer as a reference when applying for jobs elsewhere.  
Application Process, Selection and Payment:  
Applications for available oCEO program activities are invited periodically from all B.Tech and Master 
(MSc, MA, MTech) students through Institute Management System only and students are required to 
apply to the interested activities through IMS. Once selec ted, the students are required to upload the 
‘oCEO Time Card’ signed by respective supervisors in IMS  by 7th of every month for disbursement of 
remuneration.              
 General Administration Advisory 20 (Version 4.0, February 2024)   
 
 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 
GANDHINAGAR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECRUITMENT RULES  2018 
(RR 2018) 
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 24th meeting held on 27 July 2018 , 33rd 
meeting held on 15 November 2021 , 38th meeting held on 05 September 2023  and 39th 
meeting held on 19 January 2024 ) 
IITGN RR  
 
RECRUITMENT RULES 2018 
CONTENTS   
Sr. No.  Particular  Page No.  
1.  Introduction  01 
2.  Short Title and Commencement  01 
3.  Objective  02 
4.  Sanctioned Strength and Caderisation  02 
5.  Methods of Selection  02 
6.  Basic Principles  06 
7.  Power to Relax  08 
8.  Interpretation / Removal of Difficulty  08 
9.  Cadres and Levels  09 
 a. Administration and Accounts Cadre  09 
 b. Library Cadre  10 
 c. Institute Works  Cadre  11 
 d. Lab & ICT  Cadre  12 
 e. Physical Education Cadre  13 
 f. Health Services Cadre  13 
 g. Security Cadre  14 
 h. MTS Cadre  14 
 i. Driver Cadre  14 
10.  Recruitment and Promotion Criteria  15 
 a. Administration and Accounts Cadre  15 
 b. Library Cadre  25 
 c. Institute Works  Cadre  30 
 d. Lab & ICT  Cadre  34 
 e. Physical Education Cadre  40 
 f. Health Services Cadre  43 
 (i) Medics  43 
 (ii) Para -medics  45 
 g. Security Cadre  48 
 h. MTS Cadre  50 
 i. Driver Cadre  52 
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 1 of 53 
RECRUITMENT RULES  (RR) FOR NON -FACULTY  POSTS  
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION:  
 
The non-faculty staff of IIT Gandhinagar  is integral to achieving the Institute’s goals of 
excellence in academics and research. They perform multiple roles across various 
functions/  sections and therefore have to be competent and up -to-date in their 
knowledge and skills.  
 
As per  Ministry of HRD letter s dated 05 July 2010 and 10 June 2013 IITs may design 
non-faculty (administrative/ managerial/ technical)  staff structure (within the prescribed 
students to non -faculty  staff ratio of 10:1.1) and to evolve recruitment rules for each 
category of posts and implement them after duly getting the approval of Board of 
Governors. The letter s also provide for creation of a vacancy based promotion s 
independent of MACP. Accordingly, this document to outline Recruitment Rules  (RR) of 
IIT Gandhinagar  has been framed . 
 
2. SHORT TITLE AND COMMENCEMENT:  
 
a. These rules will be called IIT Gandhinagar Recruitment Rules 2018 (RR).   
 
b. These rules shall come into force on the date of their notification and, subsequently , 
all the appointments in the Institute shall be made only in accordance with the 
provisions of these rules.   
 
c. Any person appointed on regular basis and holding the post on the date of 
commencement of these rules shall be deemed to have been appointed under these 
rules and shall continue in the substantive post and, the services rendered by him / 
her in the said post before the said commencement shall be taken into account as 
regular service for deciding eligibility for promotion to the next grade.  
 
d. These RR are framed with long term perspective. Hence, many positions are 
mentioned in RR for which recruitment/ promotion may not be exercised in the near 
future.  
  
 IITGN RR  
Page 2 of 53 
3. OBJECTIVE:  
 
The main objective s of Recruitment Rules  are 
 
a. Appointment of the best suitable candidate for a post by identifying appropriate 
eligibility norms and following appropriate method of recruitment in line with the 
requirements of the post.  
 
b. To ensure fair process of selection in accordance with Act & Statutes of the Institute.  
 
c. To provide a career path to employees that will encourage consistent high 
performance and motivate employees to achieve excellence in their performance 
and attain their career goals.  
 
4. SANCTIONED STRENGTH AND CAD ERISATION:  
 
The non-faculty  posts have been classified into two categories viz.,  Administrative  and 
Technical. The posts have been organized  into cadres which consist of multiple grades/  
levels of  employees within a work domain/ functions (e.g., The Nursing cadre consists 
of Assistant Staff Nurse, Staff Nurse  and Senior Staff Nurse). The RR also as far as 
possible are aligned to the nomenclature, pay levels as per VII CPC scales  which will be 
moderated to comply with the subsequent CPC scales.  The details of cadres and levels 
therein are provided in Section 9 and their recruitment and promotion criteria are 
detailed in Section 10 . The current sanctioned posts will be mapped in these cadres and 
levels. Subsequent sanctions of posts will also be mapped accordingly.  The sanctioned 
strength is subject to periodic review as envisaged in Section 6 below.  Posts in Level 01 
to 05 are categorized as Group C post, posts in Level 06 to 09 are Group B posts, and 
posts in Level  of 10 and above are considered Group A post.  
 
5. METHODS OF SELECTION:  
 
The methods of filling up of the post in each level ha ve been prescribed for each cadre. 
Two types of selection have been adopted under IITGN  RR viz., (i) Open selection 
through direct recruitment, and (ii) Internal selection by promotion  on Merit -cum-
Seniority basis . These will be called Direct Recruitment and Promotion , respectively.  In 
addition, the Institute may go in for other modes of filling up posts, as provided for in the 
Statutes or approved by the Board.  
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 3 of 53 
 
a. Direct Recruitment is recruitment by open advertisement which is open to all 
candidates  based on prescribed age, educational qualification, experience etc. 
indicated in the IITGN  RR. The percentage of posts in a level in each cadre to be 
filled up by direct recruitment are indicated in Section 9. In addition, positions of 
group A  & B posts in all cadres to be filled by Direct Recruitment may also be filled 
by Deputation  from employees of Central, State Government o r PSUs/ Autonomous 
Bodies . Appointment on fixed tenure contract in regular pay scale shall also be part 
of this direct recruitment process.  The attributes to be evaluated for Direct 
Recruitment will include (i) competence in the area, (ii) past experience,                
(iii) communication skills, (iv) attitude to work, and (v) ethical values.  
 
The procedure of Direct Recruitment normally will be as under.  
 
Step-I:  
Applications for the post will be invited through a brief announcement/ advertisement for 
wider publicity on the official website of the Institute and in leading newspapers of 
repute. The official website will also carry detailed announcement of the post.  
 
Step-II: 
Applications received in response to the announcement will be scrutinize d by a 
Screening Committee , constituted by the Director , for eligibility. If the applications are 
large in number the Screening Committee will prepare a shortlist of the applications 
based on the shortlisting criteria approved by the Director.   
 
Step-III: 
The shortlisted candidates , as approved by the Director,  will be called for written test / 
skill test / personal inter view to be conducted by a Selection Committee constituted by 
the Director as per the provision s in the Statutes of the Institute.  
 
Step-IV: 
Depending on the number of shortlisted candidates called for the written test , the test  
may be used as only qualifying test. Only limited number of candidates may be called 
for final selection which may be based on the skill test and /or personal interview.  
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 4 of 53 
Step-V: 
If all the vacancies of a post are filled, a waiting list may be generated by the 
Selection Committee based on the merit  and this waiting list will be applicable for 
one year from the date of appointing selected candidates for the post.  
 
Step-VI: 
The final selection report of the Selection Committee is to be approved by the 
appointing authority as pr ovided in the Statutes of the Institute.  Based on the approved 
selection report, appointment orders will be issued to the selected candidates 
mentioning their post, category, salary scale, applicable allowances  and other terms of 
appointment .  
  
b. Promotion is selection from identified fee der grades from among employees, who 
have competence and potential, to a higher post through merit -cum-seniority 
assessment based on written test, APAR grading and interview regarding assessing 
credentials . These will be as per the prescribed qualification, number of years of 
qualifying service , percentage of posts to be filled by promotion etc. The assessment 
is designed to ensure that the official has sufficient opportunity to demonstrate his/her 
competence/potential for holding the higher post.  
 
The procedure of merit -cum-seniority assessment will broadly be as under.   
 
Step-I:  
Applications for the promotion post will be invited through an internal announcement   
through email or on the official website of the Institute.  
 
Step-II: 
Applications received  in response to the internal announcement will be scrutinize d by a 
Screening Committee, constituted by the Director, for eligibility. The Screening 
Committee will prepare a shortlist of the applications based on the shortlisting criteria 
approved by the Director.  
 
Step-III: 
The shortlisted candidates, as approved by the Director, will undergo assessment of 
merit -cum-seniority to be conducted by a Selection Committee  to be  constituted by the 
Director, as follows, depending on the group to/in which the promotion is to take place.  IITGN RR  
Page 5 of 53 
 
Promotion to /in Group A:  
- Director (Chair),  
- Deputy Director or Dean in -charge of the section  or a Professor nominated 
by the Director   
- Registrar  
- One expert nominee  
 
Promotion to/in Group B:  
- Deputy Director or a Dean nominated by the Director (Chair),  
- Dean in -charge of the section or a Professor nominated by the Director  
- Registrar  
- Deputy Registrar  or Assistant Registrar of the section or any other officer 
heading the section , or a faculty nominated by the Director  
 
Promotion to/in Group C:  
- Chairperson and three officers / faculty nominated by the Director  
 
The assessment of Merit -cum-Seniority will consist of the following components and 
weightage.  
(i) Assessment of APAR    : 50% weightage  
(ii) Personal test and interview   : 50% weightage  
 
Personal interview will be aimed at assessing the employees ’ suitability and 
credentials , awards and recognitions, performance in challenging task s, and work 
attitudes , etc. 
 
Step-IV: 
The final selection report based on merit -cum-seniority assessment by the Selection 
Committee is to be approved by the appointing authority as provided in the Statutes of 
the Institute.  
 
Step-V: 
Based on the approved selection report, appointment /promotion  orders to the posts will 
be issued to the selected candidates mentioning their post, category, salary scale, 
applicable allowances  and other terms of appointment .  IITGN RR  
Page 6 of 53 
6. BASIC PRINCIPLES:   
 
a. All posts will be filled up as per the methods prescribed in the RR in force at the 
time of filling of vacancies.  
 
b. RR also provides for merit -cum-seniority based career advancement in a given 
cadre based on the vacancies in the cadre.  This is in addition to the operation of 
Modified Assured Career Progression Scheme (MACPS), as applicable to IITs, 
which assures a time bound financial upgradation.   
 
c. Every recruit / promotee  shall initially be appointed on probation. The period of 
probation shall be two years from the date of appointment, which may be extended 
further by the competent authority.   
 
d. Appointment of a person on deputation or fixed tenure basis on the recommendations 
of the Selection Committee with such benefits which are similar to regular 
appointments shall be made initially for a period of two years which can be extended, 
on satisfactory performance, for a maximum period of upto five (5) years.  However, in 
exceptional cases, another tenure not exceeding five years may be given. In addition, 
persons with outstanding  performance  may be considered for regular appointment with 
the approval of the appointing a uthority. In such case the period of deputation or fixed 
tenure completed by the said person may be treated as completion of period of 
probation applicable for the said post , with the approval of the appointing a uthority . 
 
e. If any decision is taken to create a new post or re -structure any service, the RR 
shall suitably be updated f or that particular post.  
 
f. Staff strength  (as per rules in force from time to time) , vacancies and processes of 
recruitment and promotions may be reviewed/ held every year by September.  
 
g. Nothing in these rules shall affect the provisions regarding reservations, relaxation of 
age-limit and other concessions required to be provided for Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes , PwDs  and other categories as approved by the Board from time to 
time in this regard. The rosters shall be accordingly recast as per latest valid  provisions.  
 
h. Subject to the powers specified in these norms, any amendment to the provisions in 
the RR can be done only with the approval of the BoG as applicable.  
 IITGN RR  
Page 7 of 53 
i. General Age limit s for direct recruitment will be as under.  
 
Group ‘A’ – 50 years for post with Level 12  & above; 45 years for other posts . 
However , for Registrar and Librarian the age limit will be 57 years  
and for Chief Engineer a ge limit will be 55 years . 
Group ‘B’ – 32 years  
Group ‘C’ – 27 years  
 
Relaxation in age would be admissible as per Central Government Rules. Persons 
working with IITs who are educationally qualified and otherwise eligible can be 
considered for the recruitment up to a maximum age of 50 years  for the posts upto 
Level 11 . 
 
The Director may however consider extraordinary cases for relaxing  the age limits  
pertaining to fixed tenure appointments . Age limits prescribed for the posts are not 
applicable for regular employees of the Institute , and the employees joining on 
deputation . 
 
j. Qualifications and experience required for Registrar, Deputy/ Assistant Registrar and 
senior positions (Group A) in Library Cadre and Physical Education Cadre be moderated 
from time to time to match Government of India norms for IITs in this regard . 
 
k. All selections / promotions  will be made by duly constituted committee as provided in 
the Statutes  or as approved by the Board . 
 
l. The Institute has the right to set norms for short listing/  screening and the number of 
candidates to be called for the Test/  Interview based on the recommendation of  
screening committee.  
 
m. The entire recruitment process for a post starting from advertisement to holding of 
interview will normally be completed within six months.  
 
n. To the extent possible, works related to maintenance, housekeeping, hostel mess, 
horticulture, transport and other such related activities required for maintaining the 
ambiance in the Institute will be outsourced.  
 IITGN RR  
Page 8 of 53 
o. Inter-se seniority of employees selected for appointment to a post and placed in a 
particular panel shall be determined by the order of merit in which their names 
appear in that panel and not by the respective dates of their assumption of charge 
of their duties , i.e., dates of joining  to the post.  
 
p. Notwithstanding anything contained in these Rules, the Director may, in case of 
urgent need, permit appointment on short -term contract against any post included 
in these rules on a consolidated remuneration. In such cases the contract period 
shall not normally exceed one year.  
 
q. Vacancies caused by any incumbent being away on deputation, long illness, long 
leave or under any other circumstances for a duration of one year or more, may 
also be filled by way of recruitment on Deputation or Contract of fixed tenure.  
 
r. Employees who are on deputation to the Institute and are selected for absorption at 
the Institute then their regular service period during deputation will be counted for 
consideration of benefits as for a regular employee provided he/she has completed 
probation  period . 
 
s. Service of e mployee s who are on contract appointment on regular pay scale with the 
Institute may be counted for consideration of benefit s as for a regular employee .  
 
t. Provisions of FR 56(j) will be applicable as may be decided by the Board of 
Governors from time to time.  
 
7. POWER TO RELAX:  
 
When the Appointing Authority is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient to do 
so, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax any of the provisions of these 
rules with respect to any class or category of posts or persons with the approval of the 
Chairman of the Board of Governors.  
 
8. INTERPRETATION / REMOVAL OF DIFFICULTY:  
 
If any difficulty arises in the implementation or operation of any of the provisions of 
these Rules, the Director may, from time to time, issue with the approval of the 
Chairman  of Board of Governors , such general or special directions , which appear to be 
necessary for the purpose of removing such difficulty.  IITGN RR  
Page 9 of 53 
9. CADRES AND LEVELS:  
 
a. Administration and Accounts Cadre  
 
REGISTRAR *  
Level 14 (144200 -218200)  
Direct Recruitment – 100%  
 
DEPUTY REGISTRAR  
Level 13 (123100 -215900)  
Upgradation - 100%  
5 years  
DEPUTY REGISTRAR *  
Level 12 (78800 -209200)  
Direct Recruitment - 75%; Promotion -25% 
                                                                  10 years (as AR/AR (SS) in Pay Level 10/11)  
ASSISTANT REGISTRAR (SS)  
Level 11 (67700 -208700)  
Upgradation for ARs - 50% of Strength of the AR’s  
     8 years + Two required training  
ASSISTANT REGISTRAR *  
Level 10 (56100 -177500)  
Direct Recruitment -50%;  
Promotion -50% (Only those who have minimum qualification of AR)  
       5 years  
ACCOUNTS OFFICER / SUPERINTENDENT  
Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
Promotion - 100%  
5 years  
JUNIOR ACCOUNTS OFFICER * / JUNIOR SUPERINTENDENT *  
Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
Direct Recruitment -50%; Promotion -50%  Direct Recruitment -50%; Promotion -50% 
6 years    6 years  
SENIOR ACCOUNTANT  
Level 05 (29200 -92300)   SENIOR ASSISTANT  
Level 05 (29200 -92300)  
Promotion - 100%   Promotion - 100%  
5 years    5 years  
JUNIOR ACCOUNTANT  
Level 04 (25500 -81100)   ASSISTANT  
Level 04 (25500 -81100)  
Promotion -100%   Promotion -100%  
5 years    5 years  
JUNIOR ACCOUNTS ASSISTANT *  
Level 03 (21700 -69100)   JUNIOR ASSISTANT *  
Level 03 (21700 -69100)  
Direct Recruitment - 100%   Direct Recruitment - 100%  
 
* Recruitment Level    
 
(As revised by the BoG in 39th meeting)  
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 10 of 53 
 
b. Library Cadre  
 
LIBRARIAN *  
Academic Level 14 (144200 -218200)  
Direct Recruitment - 100%  
 
DEPUTY LIBRARIAN (SS)  
Academic Level 13A (131400 -217100)  
Upgradation 100%  
 5 years  
DEPUTY LIBRARIAN *  
Academic Level 12 (79800 -211500)  
Direct Recruitment - 100%  
 
ASSISTANT LIBRARIAN (SS)  
Academic Level 11 (68900 -205500)  
Upgradation - 100%  
 5 years  
ASSISTANT LIBRARIAN *  
Academic Level 10 (57700 -182400)  
Direct Recruitment -  100%  
 
ASSISTANT LIBRARY INFORMATION OFFICER  
Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
Promotion - 100%  
 5 years  
SENIOR LIBRARY INFORMATION ASSISTANT *  
Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
Direct Recruitment -  50%; Promotion - 50% 
 6 years  
LIBRARY INFORMATION ASSISTANT *  
Level 05 (29200 -92300)  
Direct Recruitment: 100%  
 
* Recruitment Level  
 
(As revised by the BoG in 33rd meeting)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 11 of 53 
 
 
 
c. Institute Works Cadre  
 
CHIEF  ENGINEER *  
Level 14 (144200 -218200)  
Direct Recruitment  - 100%  
 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER *  
Level 13 (123100 -215900)  
Direct Recruitment - 100%  
 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER *  
Level 11 (67700 -208700)  
Direct Recruitment  –50%, Promotion - 50% 
 5 years  
ASSISTANT EXECUTIVE ENGINEER  (CIVIL/ ELECTRICAL)   
Level 10 (56100 -177500)  
Promotion: 100%  
 3 years  
ASSISTANT ENGINEER (CIVIL/ ELECTRICAL) *  
Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
Direct Recruitment: 50%, Promotion: 50% 
 5 years (as JE)  
JUNIOR ENGINEER (CIVIL/ ELECTRICAL)  *  
Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
Direct Recruitment: 100%  
 
* Recruitment Level  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IITGN RR  
Page 12 of 53 
 
 
 
d. Lab & ICT  Cadre  
 
SYSTEM ENGINEER *  
Level 12 (78800 -209200)    
Direct Recruitment - 100%    
   
SENIOR SYSTEM ANALYST  
Level 11 (67700 -208700)    
Promotion - 100%   
5 years    
SYSTEM ANALYST *  
Level 10 (56100 -177500)   SENIOR TECHNICAL 
SUPERINTENDENT  
Level 09 (53100 -167800)  
Direct Recruitment -50%; Promotion -50%  Promotion -100% 
5 years    5 years  
TECHNICAL SUPERINTENDENT  
Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
Promotion - 100%  
 5 years  
JUNIOR TECHNICAL SUPERINTENDENT  * 
Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
Direct Recruitment -  50%; Promotion - 50% 
 6 years  
SENIOR LABORATORY ASSISTANT  
Level 05 (29200 -92300)  
Promotion - 100%  
 5 years  
LABORATORY ASSISTANT  
Level 04 (25500 -81100)  
Promotion - 100% 
 5 years  
JUNIOR LABORATORY ASSISTANT *  
Level 03 (21700 -69100)  
Direct Recruitment -  100%  
 
* Recruitment Level  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IITGN RR  
Page 13 of 53 
e. Physical Education Cadre  
 
ASSISTANT PHYSICAL EDUCATION OFFICER  *  
Level 09  (53100 -16780 0) 
Direct Recruitment -  75%; Promotion - 25% 
 5 years  
SENIOR PHYSICAL TRAINING INSTRUCTOR  
Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
Promotion - 100%  
 5 years  
PHYSICAL TRAINING INSTRUCTOR *  
Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
Promotion – 100% 
 6 years  
ASSISTANT PHYSICAL TRAINING INSTRUCTOR  * 
Level 05 (29200 -92300)  
Direct Recruitment -  100%  
 
f. Health Services Cadre  
 
 
(i) Medics  
CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER  * 
Level 12 (78800 -209200)  
Direct Recruitment – 100%  
 
SENIOR MEDICAL OFFICER  
Level 11 (67700 -208700)  
Promotion - 100%  
 5 years  
MEDICAL OFFICER  * 
Level 10 (56100 -177500)  
Direct Recruitment -  100%  
 
(ii) Para -medics  
SENIOR STAFF NURSE  
Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
Promotion - 100%  
 5 years  
STAFF NURSE   
Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
Promotion – 100% 
 6 years  
ASSISTANT STAFF NURSE *  
Level 05 (29200 -92300)  
Direct Recruitment - 100%  
(As revised by the BoG in 38th meeting)  
 
* Recruitment Level  
IITGN RR  
Page 14 of 53 
g. Security Cadre  
 
SECURITY OFFICER  
Level 09 (53100 -167800)  
Promotion  -  100% 
 5 years  
DEPUTY SECURITY OFFICER  
Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
Promotion – 100%  
 5 years  
ASSISTANT SECURITY OFFICER *  
Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
Direct Recruitment – 100%  
 
 
h. MTS Cadre  
Multi -Tasking Staff will include Attendants / Helpers  for Laboratory, Library, 
Maintenance , Hospitality  and Health Centre  etc. 
 
SENIOR LABORATORY ATTENDANT  / SENIOR HELPER  
Level 04 (25500 -81100)  
Promotion -100% 
 5 years  
LABORATORY ATTENDANT  / HELPER  
Level 03 (21700 -69100)  
Promotion: 100%  
 6 years  
JUNIOR LABORATORY ATTENDANT *  /  
JUNIOR HELPER * 
Level 01 (18000 -56900)  
Direct Recruitment: 100%  
 
 
i. Driver Cadre  
 
SENIOR DRIVER  
Level 05 (29200 -92300)  
Promotion: 100%  
 5 years  
DRIVER  (SS) 
Level 04 (25500 -81100)  
Promotion: 100%  
 5 years  
DRIVER *  
Level 03 (21700 -69100)  
Direct Recruitment: 100%  
 
* Recruitment Level  
  
IITGN RR  
Page 15 of 53 
10. RECRUITMENT AND PROMOTION CRITERIA  
 
Various selection criteria such as prescribed age, educational qualification, required 
experience, etc. for each post are provided hereunder  
 
a. Administration and Accounts Cadre  
10.1  Name of the Post  : Registrar  
a.  Classification  : Group A  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 14 (144200 -218200)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 57 years  
e.  Educational and other qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification:  
- Postgraduate degree with at least 55% marks 
or its equivalent grade.  
Two years degree/diploma after graduation, 
like LLB, CA , MBA  or equivalent shall be 
considered at par with PG degree.  
Minimum Experience:  
- 15 years in post(s) in Academic Pay Level 
11 or its equivalent grade and above , with 
considerable experience in administration 
at institutions of higher education/ research  
OR 
- 08 years with Academic Pay Level 12  or its 
equivalent grade and above, with considerabl e 
experience in administration at  institutions of 
higher education/research, OR  
- 15 years of administrative experience, of 
which 08 years should be with Pay Level 12 
or above in the post of Deputy Registrar or an 
equivalent post.  
Desirable:  
- A degree in Law/ Management/ Engineering 
from recognized University/ Institute.  
- Experience in educational administration, 
financial and personnel management and 
capacity to lead the administration in a 
residential institution.  
f.  Whether  age and educational  
qualifications  prescribed  for direct  
recruitment will apply in the case  of  
Promotees  : Not Applicable.  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : • Direct Recruitment or  
• Appointment on Deputation  or  
• Contract basis for a tenure of  upto 5  years or  
till attaining the age of  62 years whichever is  
earlier . 
Appointment on deputation or contract to be 
preferred.   
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  : Deputation:  
Officers under the Central/ State Governments/ IITGN RR  
Page 16 of 53 
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  Universities/ Recognized Research Institutes 
or Ins titutes of national importance:  
- holding analogous post or  
- with  at least three years regular 
administrative service in posts with Pay Level 
13 or equivalent  
j.  If a Departmental  Promotion  
Committee  exist what is its composition  : Not applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 62 years  
 
10.2  Name of the Post  : Deputy Registrar  
a.  Classification  : Group A  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 12 (78800 -209200)  
 
After 05 years of service as Deputy Registrar, the 
incumbent will move to Level 13 (123100 -215900).  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 50 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications 
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification:  
- Postgraduate degree with at least 55% marks or 
its equivalent.  
- Two years degree/diploma after graduation, like 
LLB, CA, MBA or equivalent shall be considered at 
par with PG degree.  
Minimum Experience:  
- 09 years, in post(s)  in Academic Pay Level 10 or its 
equivalent grade and above with experience in 
academic, financial, legal, and general 
administration OR  Comparable administrative 
experience in research establishments and/or 
other institutions of higher education OR  
- 5 years of administrative experience as Assistant 
Registrar in Pay Level 10 or in an equivalent post.  
Desirable:  
- Experience in computer based Finance & 
Accounts/ Audit/ Academics/ Purchase & Stores/ 
Establishment/ Personnel & HR/ General 
Administration.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case of 
Promotees  : Not applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method of recruitment, whether by 
direct requirement or by promotion or 
by deputation or absorption and 
percentage of the posts to be filled 
by various methods  : Direct Recruitment: 75%  
Promotion: 25%  
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion 
or by deputation or absorption, 
grades from which promotion or 
deputation or absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 10 years of administrative experience as Assistant 
Registrar in the Pay Level 10/11.  
- Must meet minimum qualifications criteria as per 
(e) above.  
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 17 of 53 
Deputation:  
Officers under the Central/ State Governments/ 
Universities/ Recognized Research Institutes or 
Institutes of national importance:  
- holding analogous post or  
- with at least three years regular administrative 
service in posts with Pay Level 11 or equivalent  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Not applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
(As revised by the BoG in 39th meeting)  
 
 
10.3  Name of the Post  : Assistant Registrar  
a.  Classification  : Group A  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Pay Level 10 (56100 -177500)  
 
After 08 years of service as Assistant 
Registrar, 50% of the strength , who have also 
undergone two trainings as per prevailing 
rules,  will be moved to higher Pay Level 1 1 
with the same designation  Assistant Registrar, 
though with a senior scale , as per rules  
notified from time to time . 
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 45 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification:  
- Postgraduate degree with at least 55%  
marks or its equivalent grade with good 
academic record.  
Two years degree/diploma after graduation, 
like LLB, CA , MBA  or equivalent shall be 
considered at par with PG degree.  
Minimum Experience:  
- 08 years of relevant experience with at least 03 
years of work experience in a senior 
supervisory capacity (Pay Level 07 or more) in 
areas of accounts/ audit/ general administration/ 
finance/ legal matters/ administration of 
academic and examination affairs in institution 
of higher learning or in comparable 
government/  private organizations . 
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Educational qualification shall apply.  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  
 : Direct Recruitment : 50% 
Promotion : 50% IITGN RR  
Page 18 of 53 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years administrative experience  as 
Superintendent / Accounts Officer  in Pay Level 
07. 
- Must meet minimum qualifications as per (e) 
above.  
Deputation:  
Officers under the Central/ State Governments/ 
Universities/ Recognized Research Institutes 
or Institutes of national importance:  
- holding analogous post or  
- with  at least three years regular 
administrative service in posts with Pay Level 
07 or equivalent  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per  RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
 
10.4  Name of the Post  : Superintendent  
a.  Classification  : Group B 
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable.  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable.  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion  - 100% 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years  of experience as Jr. Superintendent 
in Pay Level 06 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
 
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 19 of 53 
 
10.5  Name of the Post  : Junior Superintendent  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 32 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification & Experience:  
- Master’s Degree with at  least 55% marks with 
three years of relevant experi ence OR  
- Bachelor’s Degree with at  least 55% marks 
with five years of relevant experience.  
Two years degree/diploma after graduation, 
like LLB, CA, MBA or equivalent shall be 
considered at par with PG degree.  
Desirable:  
- Knowledge of Office Management, computer  
Office Application and Secretarial practice.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable.  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct Recruitment: 50% 
Promotion: 5 0% 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- Bachelor’s degree with 06 years of 
experience  as Senior Assistant in  Pay Level 
05 or equivalent.  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per  RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.6  Name of the Post  : Accounts Officer  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable.  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable.  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  : Promotion : 100%  IITGN RR  
Page 20 of 53 
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years of experience as Junior Accounts 
Officer  in Level  06. 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per  RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.7  Name of the Post  : Junior Accounts Officer  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 32 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification & Experience :  
- Master’s degree or equivalent with at least 
55% marks with three  years’ experienc e in 
accounting OR  
- Bachelor’s degree with at least 55% marks  
with five years ’ experience in accounting.  
Desirable:  
- Knowledge of current versions of Tally or 
such other accounting software . 
- Two years degree/diploma like MBA 
(Finance), CA or equivalent  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable.  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct recruitment: 50% 
Promotion: 50% 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 06 years of experience as Senior Accountant 
in Level 05 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per  RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.8  Name of the Post  : Senior Accountant  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 05 (29200 -92300)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  IITGN RR  
Page 21 of 53 
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable.  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years of experience as Junior Accountant  
in Level 04 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.9  Name of the Post  : Junior Accountant  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 04 (25500 -81100)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable.  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years of experience as Junior Account s 
Assistant in Level 03 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per  RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
 
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 22 of 53 
10.10   Name of the Post  : Junior Account s Assistant  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 03 (21700 -69100)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 27 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification:  
- Bachelor’s degree with at least 55% marks.  
Minimum Experience:  
- 02 years of relevant work experience in use 
of computer for accounti ng. 
Desirable:  
- Knowledge of Tally or such other accounting 
software.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable.  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct Recruitment : 100%  
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Not applicable  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Not applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.11   Name of the Post  : Senior Assistant  
a.  Classification  : Group C 
b.  Scale of Pay : Level 05 (29200 -92300)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable.  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100% 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  : Promotion:  
- 05 years of experience as Assistant in  Level 04 . IITGN RR  
Page 23 of 53 
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per  RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.12   Name of the Post  : Assistant  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 04 (25500 -81100)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable.  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years of experience as Junior Assistant in  
Level 03 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per  RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.13   Name of the Post  : Junior Assistant  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 03 (21700 -69100)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 27 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification:  
- Bachelor’s degree with at  least 55% marks in 
any discipline  with two years ’ work 
experience  using computer  applications . 
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable.  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  : Direct Recruitment: 100%  
 IITGN RR  
Page 24 of 53 
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Not applicable.  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Not applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 25 of 53 
b. Library Cadre  
10.14   Name of the Post  : Librarian  
a. Classification  : Group A  
b. Scale of Pay  : Academic Level 14 (144200 -218200)  
c. Whether selection post or non -
selection post  : Selection  
d. Age limit for direct recruitment  : 57 Years  
e. Educational and other 
qualifications required for direct 
recruitment  : Minimum Qualification:  
- Ph.D. degree in Library Science/ Information Science/ 
documentation archives & manuscript keeping.  
- Master’s degree in Library Science/ Information science/ 
documentation, with at least 55% marks or its equivalent 
grade and a consistently good academic record.  
Minimum Experience:  
- At least 10 years as a Deputy Librarian in Level 12 or 
higher at a university or a reputed institute Library.  
Desirable:  
- Substantial experience in a broad spectrum of library 
operations, including E -Resource management, 
research support services, scholarly communication, 
library instruction, digital transformation of library 
operations & practices.  
- Evidence of innovative library services, including 
integration of ICT in a Library.  
- Evidence of integration of library resources & services in 
teaching, learning and research.  
- Extensive knowledge of contemporary digital library 
practices, trends & emerging technologies.  
- Knowledge of print & digital repositories & archives  
- Knowledge of Open Science & Open Access  
-  Scholarly publications in journals of repute.  
- Leadership & management skills to build & foster close 
relationship with all stake holders.  
- Affiliation with professional bodies, library consortia & 
networks, exposure to global library practices.  
f. Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for 
direct recruitment will apply in the 
case of promotees  : Not Applicable  
g. Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h. Method of recruitment, whether by 
direct requirement or by promotion 
or by deputation or absorption and 
percentage of the posts to be filled 
by various methods  : Direct Recruitment: 100%  
i. In case of recruitment by 
promotion or by deputation or 
absorption, grades from which 
promotion or deputation or 
absorption to be made  : Deputation:  
Officers from the Library of Central/ State Governments or 
institutes of national importance or Universities/ Deemed 
University level institution or PSU/Industry:  
- holding analogous post or  
- with at least three years’ service in posts carrying Level 13 
or its equivalent and having experience in administration , 
establishment and accounts matters of the Library  
j. If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Not applicable  
k. Age of superannuation  : 62 years  
(As revised by the BoG in 33rd meeting)  IITGN RR  
Page 26 of 53 
10.15   Name of the Post  : Deputy Librarian  
a. Classification  : Group A  
b. Scale of Pay  : Academic Level 12: 79800 -211500  
(The incumbent will be moved to Academic Level 13A 
(entry pay 1,31,400) after 05 years based on 
performance assessment)  
c. Whether selection post or non -
selection post  : Selection  
d. Age limit for direct recruitment  : 50 Years  
e. Educational and other 
qualifications required for direct 
recruitment  : Minimum Qualification:  
- Postgraduate degree in Library Science / Information 
Science/ documentation, with at least 55% marks or its 
equivalent grade and a consistently good academic 
record.  
Minimum Experience:  
- At least 08 years as Assistant Librarian with Level 10 or 
higher Positions at a university or reputed institute Library . 
Desirable:  
- Demonstrated knowledge & experience in a broad 
spectrum of library operations, including E - Resource 
management, research support services, scholarly 
communication, library instruction, digital 
transformation of library operations & practices.  
- Ph.D. degree in Library Science/ Information Science/ 
documentation archives & manuscript keeping.  
- Evidence of innovative library services, including 
integration of ICT in a Library.  
- Evidence of integration of library resources & services 
using ICT in teaching, learning and research.  
- Extensive knowledge of contemporary digital library 
practices, trends & emerging technologies.  
- Knowledge of print & digital repositories & archives  
-  Scholarly publications in journals of repute.  
- Management & communication skills to build & foster 
close relationship with library team and users.  
f. Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case 
of promotees  : Not Applicable  
g. Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h. Method of recruitment, whether by 
direct requirement or by promotion 
or by deputation or absorption and 
percentage of the posts to be filled 
by various methods  : Direct Recruitment: 100%  
i. In case of recruitment by 
promotion or by deputation or 
absorption, grades from which 
promotion or deputation or 
absorption to be made  : Promotion: Not Applicable  
Deputation:  
- holding analogous post or  
- with at least three years’ service in posts carrying 
Level 11 or its equivalent and having experience in 
administration, establishment and accounts matters of 
the Library  
j. If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Not applicable  
k. Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
(As revised by the BoG in 33rd meeting)  IITGN RR  
Page 27 of 53 
10.16   Name of the Post  : Assistant Librarian  
a. Classification  : Group A  
b. Scale of Pay  : Academic Level 10:   57700 -182400  
(The incumbent will be moved to Academic Level 11 
(entry pay 68,900) after 05 years based on performance 
assessment)  
c. Whether selection post or non -
selection post  : Selection  
d. Age limit for direct recruitment  : 45 Years  
e. Educational and other 
qualifications required for direct 
recruitment  : Minimum Qualification:  
- Master degree in Library Science/ Information Science/ 
documentation, with at least 55% marks or its equivalent 
grade and a consistently good academic record.  
- Qualifying in the National Level Test (NET) conducted 
for the purpose by UGC or any other agency approved 
by UGC. However, candidates with Ph.D degree in 
Library Science shall be exempted from the eligibility 
condition of NET/SLET/SET.  
Minimum Experience:  
- At least 06 years of relevant work experience of which 
minimum 03 years in level 07 or more in a reputed 
university/research institute library.  
Desirable:  
- Demonstrated work experience of at least in one of 
the operational units of the University/ Research 
Institute Library.  
- Experience of managing E -Resources, research 
support services, scholarly communication, digital 
library operations & practices.  
- Ph.D. degree in Library Science/ Information Science/ 
documentation archives & manuscript keeping.  
- Knowledge of contemporary digital library practices, 
trends & emerging technologies.  
- Knowledge of print & digital repositories & archives  
- Communication skills to build & foster close 
relationship with library users.  
f. Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case 
of promotees  : Not Applicable  
g. Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h. Method of recruitment, whether by 
direct requirement or by promotion 
or by deputation or absorption and 
percentage of the posts to be filled 
by various methods  : Direct Recruitment: 100%  
i. In case of recruitment by 
promotion or by deputation or 
absorption, grades from which 
promotion or deputation or 
absorption to be made  : Promotion: Not Applicable  
Deputation:  
- holding analogous post or  
- with at least 03 years’ service in posts carrying Level 07 
or its equivalent and having experience in administration, 
establishment and accounts matters of the Library  
j. If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Not applicable  
k. Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
(As revised by the BoG in 33rd meeting)  IITGN RR  
Page 28 of 53 
10.17   Name of the Post  : Assistant Library Information Officer  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ experience as Senior Library 
Information  Assistant in Level 06 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.18   Name of the Post  : Senior Library Information Assistant  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 32 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification & Experience:  
- Master’s degree in Library Science/ 
Information Science / Documentation  with at 
least 55% marks or equivalent grade and 
consistently good academic record.  
- 03 years ’ relevant experience in library  of a 
reputed organization.   
Desirable:  
- One year postgraduate diploma / certificate 
course in computer application in libraries 
from a recognized Institution.  
- Proficiency in classification and cataloging of 
library materials (print and digital) and variety 
of IT tools for library applications.   
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  
 : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  : Direct Recruitment : 50% IITGN RR  
Page 29 of 53 
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  Promotion: 50% 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 06 years ’ experience as Library Information 
Assistant in Level 05 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.19   Name of the Post  : Library Information Assistant  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 05 (29200 -92300)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 27 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification & Experience:  
- Master’s Degree in Library Science/ 
Information Science/ Documentation  with at 
least 55% marks  or its equivalent  grade from 
recognized University  and consistently good 
academic record.  
Experience:  
- 01 year work experience in a reputed 
academic or research institute/ university 
library.  
Desirable  
- Proficiency in classification and cataloging of 
library materials (print and digital) and variety 
of IT tools for library application.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct Recruitment:  100%  
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Not Applicable  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion Committee 
exist what is its Composition  : Not Applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  IITGN RR  
Page 30 of 53 
c. Institute Works  Cadre  
10.20   Name of the Post  : Chief  Engineer  
a.  Classification  : Group A  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 14 (144200 -218200)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 55 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification:  
- Bachelor’s degree in Civil/ Electrical or 
equivalent from a recognized university/ 
institute .  
Minimum Experience:  
- 17 years relevant experience out of which at 
least 0 5 years of regular service in Level 13  at 
the level of Superintending Engineer.  
Desirable:  
- Master’s degree in relevant field  
- Experience in the line of coordination & 
supervision of construction and maintenance 
of civil works (including Public Health) in  a 
Public Works Department.  
- Knowledge and experience of estate matters 
& public premises act/rules.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct Recruitment : 100%  
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Deputation:  
- A person holding analogous post, or having at 
least 0 5 years of relevant experience as SE in 
Level 13 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Not applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.21   Name of the Post  : Superintending Engineer  
a.  Classification  : Group A  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 13 (123100 -215900)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 50 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification  & Experience : 
- BE/B.Tech  with 12 years ’ experience  of which  
07 years  as Executive  Engineer  or equivalent  
in Level 11  or more.  
 IITGN RR  
Page 31 of 53 
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct Recruitment: 100%  
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Deputation:  
- A person holding analogous post, or having at 
least 0 7 years relevant experience in Level 11  
at the level of Executive Engineer . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Not applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.22   Name of the Post  : Executive Engineer  
a.  Classification  : Group A  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 11 (67700 -208700)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 45 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification:  
- Bachelor’s d egree in Civil/ Electrical 
Engineering or equivalent  
Minimum Experience:  
- 05 years ’ experience as Assistant Executive 
Engineer  in Level 10  OR  
- 08 years relevant experience  as Assistant 
Engineer in Level 07 . 
Desirable:  
- The applicant must have adequate 
experience in planning, construction and 
maintenance of buildings and bulk services 
like WTP, STP etc.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct Recruitment : 50%,  
Promotion: 50% 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- B.E/B.Tech with 05 years ’ experience in Level 
10 or 08 years’ service as Assistant Engineer 
in Level 07 . IITGN RR  
Page 32 of 53 
Deputation:  
- A person holding analogous post, or having at 
least 0 5 years relevant experience Level 10  at 
the level of Assistant Executive Engineer  or 08 
years in Level 07 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.23   Name of the Post  : Assistant Executive Engineer   
(Civil/ Electrical)  
a.  Classification  : Group A  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 10 (56100 -177500)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 03 years ’ experience  as Assistant Engineer in 
Level 07 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.24   Name of the Post  : Assistant Engineer (Civil/ Electrical)  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 32 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification  & Experience : 
- B.E/B.Tech in Civil/ Electrical Engineering 
with at least 55% marks with 03 years 
relevant professional experience  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  IITGN RR  
Page 33 of 53 
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct recruitment: 50% 
Promotion: 50% 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ experience as Jr. Engineer in Level 
06. 
 
Deputation:  
- A person holding analogous post, or having at 
least 0 5 years relevant experience in Level 06  
at the level of Junior Engineer.  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.25   Name of the Post  : Junior Engineer  (Civil/ Electrical)  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 32 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification  & Experience : 
- Three years Diploma  with at least 55% marks  
in Civil/ Electrical Engineering with 03 years of 
relevant experience  in Level 04 . Proficiency in 
use of relevant computer software.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct recruitment: 100% 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  Not applicable   
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Not applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
 
 
 
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 34 of 53 
 
d. Lab & ICT  Cadre  
10.26   Name of the Post  : Systems Engineer  
a.  Classification  : Group A  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 12 (78800 -209200)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 50 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification  & Experience : 
- First Class M.E . / M.Tech with 08 years ’ 
experience in senior position in reputed 
computer/ ICT organization.  
Desirable:  
- Degree in Computer Science/ Engineering/ 
Information Technology  
- Expertise in the system administration in Unix/ 
Linux, RDBMS, experience of system analysis/ 
design, good c ommand on Java, JSP . 
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct recruitment: 100%  
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Deputation:  
Officers from Central/State Governments or 
Institutes of national importance or 
universities/institutions or PSU/industry : 
- holding analogous post or with at least 05 
years’ service in posts carrying Level 11  or its 
equivalent.  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Not Applicable  
 
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.27   Name of the Post  : Senior System Analyst  
a.  Classification  : Group A  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 11 (67700 -208700)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  IITGN RR  
Page 35 of 53 
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100% 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ experience in Level 10  as System 
Analyst.  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.28   Name of the Post  : System Analyst  
a.  Classification  : Group A  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 10 (56100 -177500)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 45 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification & Experience:  
- ME/ M.Tech  with at least 55% marks  with at 
least 02 years relevant experience OR  
- BE/ B.Tech. with at least 55% marks and at 
least  04 years ’ relevant experience  OR 
- First Cl ass MCA with 06 years’ relevant 
experience .  
Desirable:  
- Degree in Computer Science / Engineering  / 
information Technology.   
- Expertise in the system administration in 
Unix/ Linux, RDBMS, experience of system 
analysis/ design, good command on Java, 
JSP.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct recruitment: 50% 
Promotion: 50% 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ relevant experience as Technical 
Superintendent  in Level 07 . 
Deputation:  
Officers from Central/State Governments or 
Institutes of national importance or 
universities/institutions or PSU/industry : 
- holding analogous post or  IITGN RR  
Page 36 of 53 
- with at least 05 years’ service in posts 
carrying Level 07 or its equivalent.  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.29   Name of the Post  : Senior Technical Superintendent  
a.  Classification  : Group B 
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 09 (53100 -167800)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ experience as Technical 
Superintendent  in Level 07 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.30   Name of the Post  : Technical Superintendent  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable.  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion : 100%  IITGN RR  
Page 37 of 53 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years of experience as Jr. Technical 
Superintendent  in Level 06 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.31   Name of the Post  : Junior Technical Superintendent  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 32 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment as JTS  : Minimum Qualification & Experience:  
- Bachelor’s degree with at least 55% marks in 
relevant branches of engineering  with two 
years’ work experience  OR  
- Master’s degree with at least 55% marks in 
relevant branches of Science with 03 years ’ 
work experience OR  
- M.Tech with at least 55% marks in relevant 
branch of engineering with one year of work 
experience, preferably at laboratories of 
institutions of national importance.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct recruitment: 50%  
Promotion: 50%  
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 06 years ’ experience as Senior Laboratory  
Assistant in Level 05.  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.32   Name of the Post  : Senior Laboratory Assistant  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 05 (29200 -92300)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  IITGN RR  
Page 38 of 53 
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ experience as Laboratory Assistant 
in Level 04 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.33   Name of the Post  : Laboratory Assistant  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 04 (25500 -81100)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ experience as Junior Laboratory 
Assistant in Level 03 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
 
 
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 39 of 53 
10.34   Name of the Post  : Junior Laboratory Assistant  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 03 (21700 -69100)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 27 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification & Experience:  
- BE/ B.Tech degree with at least 55% marks 
in relevant discipline OR  
- Three years Diploma with at least 55% marks 
in Engineering  with 0 2 years’ work 
experience in laboratory/  research 
programme OR 
- B.Sc in relevant area with 0 2 year work 
experience in laboratory/ research 
programme OR  
- ITI with at least 55% marks with 06 years’ 
work experience and good knowledge of 
computer utilization.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  
 : Direct recruitment: 100%  
 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Not applicable  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Not Applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  :  60 years  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 40 of 53 
e. Physical Education Cadre  
10.35   Name of the Post  : Assistant Physical Education Officer  
a.  Classification  : Group B 
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 09  (53100-16780 0) 
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 45 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification  & Experience:  
- Master’s Degree  (two years course)  in Physical  
Education with at least 55% marks.  
- Diploma in Coaching from NIS or recognized 
sports university  
- At least 0 5 years relevant coaching 
experience  in Level 07 . 
Desirable:  
- Coaching  experience in Football/ Basketball/ 
Badminton/  Volleyball/ Lawn -Tennis / 
Cricket/ Table Tennis/ Squash/ Swimming/ 
Athletics.  
- Representation at district/ state or national 
level in any of these above fields.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct recruitment: 75% 
Promotion: 25% 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ experience as Sr. PTI in Level 07 . 
 
Deputation:  
- holding analogous post or  
- with at least 05 years’ service in posts 
carrying Level 07  with relevant coaching 
experience . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.36   Name of the Post  : Senior Physical Training Instructor  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable.  IITGN RR  
Page 41 of 53 
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ experience as PTI in Level 06 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.37   Name of the Post  : Physical Training Instructor  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100% 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 06 years ’ experience as APTI in Level 05 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
 
 
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 42 of 53 
 
10.38   Name of the Post  : Assistant Physical Training Instructor  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 05 (29200 -92300)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 27 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification & Experience:  
- A Bachelor’s Degree in Physical Education 
with at least 55% marks with diploma in 
coaching  from NIS or recognized Sports 
University, with at least two years of relevant 
coaching experience OR 
- A Bachelor’s Degree in Physical Education 
with at least 55% marks with a minimum of  
05 years ’ relevant coaching experience, OR  
- Master’s Degree (2 years course) in Physical 
Education with at least 55% marks  with a 
minimum of two years of relevant coaching 
experience . 
Desirable:  
- Representation at district/ state or national 
level in any of these - Football/ Basketball/ 
Badminton/ Volleyball/ Lawn -Tennis/ Cricket/ 
Table Tennis/ Squash/ Swimming/ Athletics.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct Recruitment : 100% 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Not Applicable  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Not Applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
 
 
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 43 of 53 
f. Health Services Cadre  
 
(i) Medics  
 
10.39   Name of the Post  : Chief Medical Officer  
a.  Classification  : Group A  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 12 (78800 -209200)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 50 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification:  
- MS/MD in clinical disciplines (Gen. 
Medicine, Gen. Surgery, Pediatrics, Obst. & 
Gyn, Orthopedics, etc.) or equivalent degree 
recognized by the relevant agency 
authorized by the Government of India. The 
candidate should be first class throughout 
his/her education.  
Minimum Experience:  
- 8 years of experience as a Medical Officer in 
Level 10 or equivalent grade in the reputed 
and recognized hospital with not less than 
20 beds.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct Recruitment - 100%  
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion - Not Applicable  
 
Deputation:  
Officers under the Central/ State Governments / 
Universities/Recognized Research Institutes or 
Institutes of national importance  
- holding analogous post.  
- with at le ast three years experience as a 
Senior Medical Officer in Level 11 or 
equivalent grade.  
- 8 years of experience as a Medical Officer in 
Level 10 or equivalent grade.  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Not Applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 65 years  
(As revised by the BoG in 38th meeting)  
 
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 44 of 53 
10.40   Name of the Post  : Senior Medical Officer  
a.  Classification  : Group A  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 11 (67700 -208700)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years’ experience as a Medical Officer in 
Level 10.  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 65 years  
(As revised by the BoG in 38th meeting)  
 
10.41   Name of the Post  : Medical Officer  
a.  Classification  : Group A  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 10 (56100 -177500)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 45 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification:  
- MBBS degree, from a University/Institute,  
recognized by the relevant agency 
authorised by the Government of India 
including completion of Compulsory Rotary 
Internship (CRI) with at least 60% marks or 
equivalent grade. The person should be the 
first class throughout his/her education.  
Minimum Experience:  
- At least 3 years working experience after the 
degree in the reputed and recognized 
hospital with not less than 20 beds 
(Specialization as per requirement).  
Desirable:  
- MD or MS in an appropriate branch of 
Medicine with at least 1 year working 
experience after the degree in the reputed 
and recognized hospitals with not less than 
20 beds.  
 IITGN RR  
Page 45 of 53 
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct recruitment - 100%  
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion: Not Applicable  
 
Deputation:  
- Officers under the Central/ State 
Governments / Universities/Recognized 
Research Institutes or Institutes of national 
importance holding analogous post.  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Not Applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 65 years  
(As revised by the BoG in 38th meeting)  
 
(ii) Para -medics  
 
10.42   Name of the Post  : Senior Staff Nurse  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay : Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ experience  as  Staff  Nurse  in  
Level 06 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
 IITGN RR  
Page 46 of 53 
 
10.43   Name of the Post  : Staff Nurse  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 06 years ’ experience as Assistant Staff Nurse 
in Level 05 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.44   Name of the Post  : Assistant Staff Nurse  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 05 (29200 -92300)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 27 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification:  
- Intermediate / 10 + 2 or equivalent .  
- Must have passed the examination held by 
the Nursing Council with 3 years course in 
General Nursing and Midwifery  
- Must be registered with Indian Nursing 
Council / State Nursing Council.  
Minimum Experience:  
- 03 years ’ experience in a hospital recognized 
by the Central or State Nursing Council or at 
a medical dispensary of a Government / Semi 
Government/ Public Sector institution . 
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  IITGN RR  
Page 47 of 53 
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct recruitment: 100%  
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Not Applicable  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Not Applicable . 
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
  IITGN RR  
Page 48 of 53 
g. Security Cadre  
10.45   Name of the Post  : Security Officer  
a.  Classification  : Group B 
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 09 (53100 -167800)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ experience as Deputy Security 
Officer in Level 07 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.46   Name of the Post  : Deputy Security Officer  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 07 (44900 -142400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100% 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ experience as Assistant Security 
Officer in Level 06 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  IITGN RR  
Page 49 of 53 
 
10.47   Name of the Post  : Assistant Security Officer  
a.  Classification  : Group B  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 06 (35400 -112400)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 32 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification  & Experience : 
- Graduate with 55% marks and 05 years 
relevant experience  in Military, Paramilitary, 
Police, or Security organisation . 
- Have driving license for light vehicle and  
motor cycle and license to handle fire arms 
and be conversant in conducting enquires & 
investigation and managing contacts.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct Recruitment: 100% 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Not Applicable  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Not Applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
  IITGN RR  
Page 50 of 53 
i. MTS Cadre  
Multi -Tasking Staff will include Attendants/ Helpers for Laboratory, Library, 
Maintenance, Hospitality and Health Centre etc.  
 
10.48   Name of the Post  : Senior Laboratory Attendant / Senior Helper  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 04 (25500 -81100)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ experience as Laboratory 
Attendant / Technical Helper  in Level 03 . 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.49   Name of the Post  : Laboratory Attendant  / Helper  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 03 (21700 -69100)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 06 years ’ experience as Junior Laboratory 
Attendant or Junior Technical Helper  in Level 
01. IITGN RR  
Page 51 of 53 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.50   Name of the Post  : Junior Laboratory Attendant  /  
Junior Helper  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 01 (18000 -56900)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 27 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification  & Experience : 
- Tenth standard pass  plus one year’s trade 
training with ITI certificate or equivalent in 
any discipline associated with Manufacturing, 
Electrical, Chemical, Civil or Computers,  
Maintenance plus relevant work experience 
of at least 03 years, OR  
- Tenth standard pass with at least 05 years of 
professional experience  in relevant area at 
reputed organi zation.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct recruitment: 100%  
 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Not applicable  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its composition  : Not Applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
  IITGN RR  
Page 52 of 53 
j.  Driver Cadre  
10.51   Name of the Post  : Senior Driver  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 05 (29200 -92300)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ experience as Driver  (SS) in Level 
04. 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.52   Name of the Post  : Driver  (SS) 
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 04 (25500 -81100)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Not Applicable  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Promotion: 100%  
 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion or  
by  deputation  or  absorption,  grades  
from which promotion or deputation or  
absorption to be made  
 : Promotion:  
- 05 years ’ experience as Driver in Level 03 . IITGN RR  
Page 53 of 53 
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Selection by committee constituted as per RR/ 
Statutes of IIT Gandhinagar.  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
 
10.53   Name of the Post  : Driver  
a.  Classification  : Group C  
b.  Scale of Pay  : Level 03 (21700 -69100)  
c.  Whether selection post or non - 
selection post  : Selection  
d.  Age limit for direct recruitment  : 27 years  
e.  Educational and other  qualifications  
required for direct recruitment  : Minimum Qualification  & Experience : 
- 12th with at least 55% marks with light & 
heavy duty driving license with badge plus 7 
years ’ experience  of driving staff cars OR  
- 12th with at least 55% marks passed with ITI 
certificate and driving license for both heavy 
and light vehicle and 5 years’ relevant 
experience.  
f.  Whether age and educational 
qualifications prescribed for direct 
recruitment will apply in the case  of 
Promotees  : Not Applicable  
g.  Period of probation, if any  : Two years  
h.  Method  of  recruitment,  whether  by  
direct requirement or by promotion or  
by   deputation   or   absorption   and  
percentage of the posts to be filled by  
various methods  : Direct Recruitment: 100%  
 
 
i.  In case of recruitment by promotion 
or by  deputation  or  absorption,  
grades  from which promotion or 
deputation or  absorption to be made  : Not Applicable  
j.  If a Departmental Promotion 
Committee exist what is its 
composition  : Not Applicable  
k.  Age of superannuation  : 60 years  
  
General Administration  Advisory  05 (Version 1.0, July 2012 ) Page 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
 COMMUNITY OUTREACH POLICY OF THE INSTITUTE  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 4th meeting held on 03 September 2011)  
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar (IITGN) believes in being an involved m ember of 
the community and a good neighbour. It believes in engaging with the community of which it 
is a part.  Our presence should have a positive impact not only on those who are formally 
part of the Institute (its students, staff, and faculty), but also  on those who surround us, and 
whose lives are affected by the presence of the Institute in one way or the other.  
As educators, we will like to pursue means to bridge the knowledge and communication 
gaps that exist between the privileged and the underpriv ileged. It is a high priority for IITGN 
to sensitize its students about the importance of community engagement, and to encourage 
them to see the world from the eyes of those who are far less privileged.  The Institute will 
like its students to be aware of the fundamental and structural problems facing our country 
and the communities that lie within it, so that they could become a part of the solution to 
such problems.  
IITGN will constantly look for ways to be engaged with and contribute to the local 
communi ty. It will do this through formal and informal initiatives, outreach activities, and 
educational engagement. The Institute will support and raise funds for voluntary activities 
driven primarily by students, staff, and faculty which foster social responsib ility, and social 
sensitivity.  Research and Development Advisory 14 (Version 1.0, January 201 9)  Page 1 of 1 
 
  
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
NORMS FOR OVERHEAD CONTRIBUTION FROM EXTERNAL PROJECTS  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 25th meeting held on 03 December 2018 ) 
 
The Board in its 25th meeting held on 03 December 2018  has approved the revised 
norm s for overhead contribution from external projects  as follows:  
 
1. A sum equal to 12.5% of the overhead from a sponsored research project will be 
credited to the PDA of the concerned faculty member. If more than one faculty 
member is actively involved in a project, the amount may be distributed among 
them appropriately.  
2. A sum equal to 12.5% of the overhead from a sponsored research project will be 
credited to the Discipline Promotion Account (DPA) of the concerned discipline. If 
faculty from more than one discipline are actively engaged in the project, the 
amount may be d istributed to those disciplines appropriately.  
3. A sum equal to 15% of the overheads from a consulting project or a continuing 
education programme/ conference/ workshop will be credited to the Discipline 
Promotion Account (DPA) of the concerned discipline. If faculty from more than 
one discipline are actively engaged in the project, the amount may be distributed 
to those disciplines appropriately.  
4. In case of more than one faculty members or more than one discipline being 
involved, the ratio for distribution  may be decided by the concerned faculty 
members with approval of Dean R&D. In case of dispute, Director may decide the 
ratio on recommendation of Dean R&D.  
5. The faculty members may also credit any honorarium due to them through chairs/ 
fellowships, consult ing projects, continuing education programmes, summer 
courses, etc., to their PDA or to DPA. Similarly, when laboratory facilities are 
utilized for consulting projects, the facility charges may be credited to DPA.  
6. Discipline Coordinators will be PI for the  DPA, while the concerned faculty 
members will be PI for their own PDA. Expenditure from DPA and PDA will be  
made in the usual project mode with usual delegation of authority.  
7. PDA and DPA can be accumulated over time, but will not earn any interest.  
 
Thes e norms will be applicable from 01 April 2019, that is, all overheads received by 
the Institute thereafter will be subject to these norms for distribution.  
 Research and Development Advisory 01 (Version 3.0, June 201 5)                                          Page 1 of 1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
 
RESEARCH INITIATION GRANT  
(As approved by the Board of Governors in its 16th meeting held on 21 April 2015)  
 
The Institute expects the faculty to win grants for funding their research. Office of 
Dean Research and Development facilitat es the faculty in seeking research funds. 
However, considering that the external fundin g agencies may take some  time to take 
their decision, the Institute provides research initiation grant . This grant is mainly  to 
augment  research facilities  of the Institute . With t he grant the fa culty may create basic 
facilities. The results thereof should help faculty win larger funding from external 
agencies. S eeking external grant s is a  continuous process throughout the career of 
the faculty members. Thus, the Institute expects the research initiation grant to 
nucleate a dvanced research that would eventually grow into a  center of excellence . 
 
The norms of the Research Initiation Grant as approved by the Board are outlined 
below . 
 
1. The Institute  will provide  a fully functional  office  when  a new faculty  member  joins.  
This includes  desktop  computer,  printer,  data card,  and a landline  phone.  
 
2. A research grant  of Rs. 2.5 lakh will be provided  to all new career  faculty  members  
on joining.  This grant  may be used  to meet  miscellaneous  initial  expenses  to get 
started  on research,  such  as domestic  travel,  field work,  laptop,  iPad,  additional  
desktop,  etc.  
 
3. The faculty  member  will be expected  to develop  and submit  at least  one research  
proposal  for external  funding  within  60 days  of joining  the Institute.  Faculty  member  
may request  extension  for project  submission  with reasons  within  60 days  if he/ 
she is unable  to submit  the external  project  in time.  
 
4. If a faculty  member  does  not intend  seeking  external  grant,  he/ she is expected  to 
write  a note to Professor -in-charge  R&D  giving  reasons.  For instance,  some  
colleagues  working  in theoretical  areas  may not require  any funds  for their 
research.   
 
5. Internal  research  funds  will be provided  to assist  the faculty  members  initiate  their 
research  activity  quickly.  However,  this internal  funding  will be considered  only 
after the submission  of external  project  proposal.   
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GANDHINAGAR  
  
NORMS FOR INSTITUTE PH.D FELLOWSHIP TO EXCELLENT  
CANDIDATES WITHOUTREQUIREMENT OF GATE/CSIR   
  
 (Updated in the 33rd Senate meeting held on 22nd November 2018 and approved by 
the BoG in its 25th Meeting held on 3rd December 2018)  
 
The Institute has been making continuous efforts to attract excellent students to its PhD 
program. Accordingly, a scheme where top -quality students who do not have a valid GATE, 
NET or equivalent exam qualification, but  are shortlisted after a rigorous selection process by 
the Institute, was approved by the Board of Governors in its 13th meeting held on 14th March 
2014. Students admitted to the Institute without having qualified the GATE/NET/equivalent 
exam have typicall y been paid fellowship from the Excellence funds of the Institute at a rate 
similar to regular Ph.D. scholars.  
 
The PhD program has now stabilized and students supported through Excellence funds need to 
be shifted to MHRD funds. Therefore:  
 
1. The number of students without a GATE/NET/equivalent national exam admitted in each 
academic year be limited to less than 25% of the total number of career faculty members 
at the beginning of that academic year.  
2. These students will receive fellowship from  Excellence funds at a rate similar to the 
regular Institute fellowship during their first year. During this time, students will be 
expected to obtain GATE/NET, etc. qualification, as applicable.   
3. If a student fails to qualify the applicable national leve l exam, the fellowship will be 
reduced to 75% of the regular fellowship amount for the second year, and 50% in the 
third year and beyond.  
4. The fellowship will be paid for a maximum of 5 years. No fellowship will be given after 5 
years in the program.  
5. If a student qualifies GATE/NET, etc. at any point, he/she will be provided fellowship 
from MHRD funds at the regular rate from date of announcement of GATE/NET results.  
6. If a student obtains CSIR -JRF or some other equivalent fellowship at any point, he/she 
will receive that fellowship from the earliest applicable date.  
7. Upon qualification of the applicable exam, the student will also become eligible for 
Institute support beyond the 5th year (at a reduced rate) similar to regular PhD students.  
 
This will be appli cable for all students admitted in and after Semester 1, 2018 -19. For students 
who joined prior to this time, the Chairman, Senate upon recommendation of the Dean, 
Academic Affairs, may decide on the continuation of the fellowship and the amount on a case -
to-case basis.  
 
This will not be applicable to students admitted via the Start Early PhD program.  
 
 
 
  
Page 1  Academic Affairs Advisory 2    5   (Version 3.0,  January    201 9)   